
How to Not Be at the Mercy of a Trumpified G.O.P.
The New York Times 
February 23, 2021 Tuesday 13:38 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1316 words
Byline: Jamelle Bouie
Highlight: Barack Obama asked Democrats to kill the filibuster and pass a voting rights bill because it was the right thing to do. There’s a stronger argument.
Body




Barack Obama asked Democrats to kill the filibuster and pass a voting rights bill because it was the right thing to do. There’s a stronger argument.
Last year, in his eulogy for Representative John Lewis, President Barack Obama urged Congress to pass a new voting rights act to continue the work of the lifelong civil rights activist.
“If politicians want to honor John, and I’m so grateful for the legacy of work of all the Congressional leaders who are here, but there’s a better way than a statement calling him a hero,” Obama said. “You want to honor John? Let’s honor him by revitalizing the law that he was willing to die for.”
Obama then called on federal lawmakers to lift as many barriers to voting as they could. “Once we pass the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, we should keep marching to make it even better,” he said, listing automatic voter registration, felon re-enfranchisement, a national voting holiday, D.C. statehood and curbs on partisan gerrymandering as reforms that would do justice to Lewis’s memory. “And if all this takes eliminating the filibuster,” Obama concluded, “then that’s what we should do.”
Although he probably expected them to win in November, Obama said this not knowing whether Democrats would have a majority in the Senate come the start of the next Congress. Well, Democrats have that majority. And thanks in large part to the work of John Lewis and those who followed in his footsteps, it rests on two senators from Georgia, whose political futures rest in turn on whether every voter in the state has equal access to the ballot.
The same is true in Arizona, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, where slim margins made the difference between Democratic victory and Republican defeat in the last election, and where Republican legislative majorities are determined to keep Democrats as far from power as possible — and not to lose the next presidential election the way they lost the last one. To that end, they have introduced bills to restrict the vote, to make the race for the Electoral College — as well as any race for statewide office — as noncompetitive as possible, by taking as many Democratic voters off the board as they can.
Obama asked Democrats to kill the filibuster and pass a voting rights bill because it was the right thing to do. But there’s a stronger argument: that if Democrats don’t do this, they’ll be at the mercy of a Trumpified Republican Party that has radicalized against democracy itself.
Democrats have already written the kind of voting rights bill Obama spoke about. It’s the For the People Act, designated as H.R. 1 in the House and S. 1 in the Senate. If passed and signed into law, it would establish automatic, same-day and online voter registration, protect eligible voters from overly broad purges that remove them from the rolls, restore the Voting Rights Act with a new formula for federal preclearance (which would require select cities and localities to submit new voting rules to the Justice Department for clearance), re-enfranchise the formerly incarcerated, strengthen mail-in voting systems, institute nationwide early voting and increase criminal penalties for voter intimidation.
House Democrats introduced H.R. 1 in 2019 at the start of the 116th Congress. Mitch McConnell, then the majority leader of the Senate, denounced the bill as a “naked attempt to change the rules of American politics to benefit one party” and told reporters it was dead on arrival. “This is a terrible proposal,” he said that March, “it will not get any floor time in the Senate.”
McConnell no longer controls the floor, but with a de facto supermajority requirement in the Senate, the For the People Act is still dead on arrival. That is, unless Democrats kill the legislative filibuster and restore majority rule to the chamber. Right now, Senators Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona and Joe Manchin of West Virginia are the most vocal Democratic opponents of ending the filibuster. “I want to restore the 60-vote threshold for all elements of the Senate’s work,” Sinema said earlier this month, seemingly mistaking McConnell’s Obama-era innovation for an age-old tradition. Manchin has also been emphatic about keeping the supermajority requirement, telling Politico that he will “not vote in this Congress” to change the filibuster.
Manchin, who has been winning elections in West Virginia for the last 20 years, is safe in his seat for as long as he wants it. Sinema, on the other hand, is much more vulnerable. Not the least because Arizona’s Republican state Legislature, to say nothing of its Republican Party, is all-in on “stop the steal” and Donald Trump’s war on mail-in voting. Arizona Republicans have already introduced bills to limit voter registration drives, require notarized signatures for mailed ballots and forbid voters from actually mailing-in completed ballots.
Arizona Republicans are not alone. To date, according to the Brennan Center for Justice at N.Y.U.’s law school, Republicans in 33 states have introduced more than 165 bills to restrict voting, part of the national conservative backlash to the results of the 2020 presidential election. A bill in Georgia would put new restrictions on absentee and in-person early voting; four different bills in Pennsylvania would eliminate no-excuse absentee voting less than two years after Republican lawmakers voted it into law.
Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the No. 2 Republican in the House, captured the mood of the party when, on Sunday, he refused to say that the election wasn’t stolen from Trump. “Once the electors are counted, yes, he’s the legitimate president,” Scalise said in an interview with Jonathan Karl of ABC News, speaking of Joe Biden. “But if you’re going to ignore the fact that there were states that did not follow their own state legislatively set laws. That’s the issue at heart, that millions of people still are not happy with and don’t want to see happen again.”
This is euphemism. There was no issue with the election. State legislatures passed laws, courts interpreted them, and officials put them into action. This was true in states Trump won, like Texas and North Carolina, as much as it was in states he lost. It almost goes without saying that the real issue, the reason Republicans are actually unhappy, is that Biden is president and Democrats control Congress.
Devoted to Trump, and committed to his fictions about the election, Republicans are doing everything they can to keep voters from holding them and their leaders accountable. They will restrict the vote. They will continue to gerrymander themselves into near-permanent majorities. A Republican in Arizona has even proposed a legislative veto over the popular vote in presidential elections, under the dubious theory that state legislatures have unconditional, unlimited and unrestricted power to allocate electoral votes.
The good news is that Democrats in Congress have it in their power to stop a lot of this nonsense, to pre-emptively weaken the rising tide of voter suppression. All it takes is a simple vote to make the Senate work according to majority rule, as the founding fathers intended.
The alternative is to allow the supermajority requirement to stand, to allow endless stagnation, to abdicate the authority of Congress to govern the country and tackle its problems, to deny the party of collective action the ability to act for the public good and to give the party of plutocrats and demagogues free rein to twist the institutions of the American republic against its values.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: RIGHT TO VOTE (92%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (92%); CIVIL RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (91%); REDISTRICTING (91%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (91%); VOTERS & VOTING (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); VOTER REGISTRATION (89%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US ELECTORAL COLLEGE (78%); VOTER DISQUALIFICATION (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (77%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STATEHOOD (53%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Absentee Voting (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); Republican Party (%); Senate (%); Lewis, John R (%); McConnell, Mitch (%); Obama, Barack (%); Sinema, Kyrsten (%)
 Person: BARACK OBAMA (94%); KYRSTEN SINEMA (92%); JOHN LEWIS (91%); ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); MITCH MCCONNELL (73%); Lewis, John R; McConnell, Mitch; Obama, Barack; Sinema, Kyrsten
 Geographic: ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: February 23, 2021

 

End of Document
The Senate Has Become a Dadaist Nightmare
The New York Times 
February 4, 2021 Thursday 18:34 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1799 words
Byline: Ezra Klein
Highlight: No one would ever design a legislative body that worked this way.
Body




No one would ever design a legislative body that worked this way.
This week, congressional Democrats advanced a budget resolution — the first step in using the filibuster-proof budget reconciliation process to pass President Biden’s $1.9 trillion fiscal rescue plan. I recognize that is not the most thrilling start to a column. But now that Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have pledged their undying fealty to the filibuster, the budget reconciliation process is where Biden’s agenda will live or die. Oy, is that depressing.
Budget reconciliation reveals the truth of how the Senate legislates now. To counter the minority’s abuse of the filibuster rule, the majority abuses another rule, ending in a process that makes legislation systematically and undeniably worse. The world’s greatest deliberative body has become one of its most absurd, but that absurdity is obscured by baroque parliamentary tricks that few understand.
“Budget reconciliation.” It sounds sober, important and official. But it’s farcical — or it would be, if the consequences weren’t so grievous.
It’s understood, by now, that the filibuster has mutated into something it was never intended to be: a 60-vote supermajority requirement on almost all legislation considered by the United States Senate. I have made my case against the filibuster in detail before, and I won’t repeat it here. Suffice to say, in a closely divided Senate, with highly polarized parties, it’s almost impossible to get 60 votes on major legislation. But there’s a workaround, and that workaround is getting both wider and dumber.
The budget reconciliation process was created in the Congressional Budget Act of 1974. It was an afterthought: an optional process to let Congress quickly clean up its spending plans so they matched the budget. No one even used it until 1980. But as the Senate was stalled by more frequent filibusters, clever legislators realized that the budget reconciliation process was immune to the filibuster, as it was limited to 20 hours of debate, and all kinds of bills could be routed through it.
In response, Senator Robert Byrd persuaded his colleagues to pass new rules to ensure budget reconciliation remained true to its original purpose. These rules, formally enshrined in the Budget Act in 1990, impose a series of tests on budget reconciliation bills. The most consequential are that every individual provision of the bill must alter taxes or spending, and not in a “merely incidental” way; the bill cannot increase deficits after the budget window, which is usually around 10 years; and the bill cannot muck with Social Security. Any senator can challenge any provision of any budget reconciliation bill for violating these rules. The parliamentarian then rules on the question, and if the parliamentarian rules for the challenger, the provision is struck from the bill. (The Senate can choose to ignore the parliamentarian, just as they can vote to change any Senate rule. That hasn’t happened yet where budget reconciliation is concerned, but it may soon. More on that later.)
Byrd’s reforms didn’t work as he intended. The problem of the filibuster demanded a solution, and even covered in “Byrd droppings,” budget reconciliation was the closest thing to an alternative. The Byrd rules didn’t prevent non-budgetary legislation from being passed through reconciliation, but they did make that legislation worse, and weirder, and the Senate has simply decided to live with the ridiculous results, and make the rest of us live with them, too.
President George W. Bush’s tax cuts, for instance, were designed to expire — expire! — after 10 years because otherwise they would have increased deficits after 10 years, and so been ineligible for reconciliation. President Donald Trump’s tax cuts employ the same trick. This is a legacy of budget reconciliation: Massive chunks of our tax code are just set to disappear at an arbitrary point in the future, and what happens then is anybody’s guess.
The distortions don’t end there. Budget reconciliation warps policy design by pushing away from regulation and toward direct spending and taxation. An example: If you were designing a health care bill in budget reconciliation, you couldn’t pass a rule saying private insurers had to cover pre-existing conditions. But you could add a trillion dollars to Medicaid funding so it could cover anyone with pre-existing conditions who couldn’t get private insurance. Or to use an example that is actually in the reconciliation package Democrats are designing now: You can pass $1,400 checks through budget reconciliation, but you can’t pass emergency paid leave. When Congress writes laws through budget reconciliation, it writes them with one arm tied behind its back.
Even worse is the way budget reconciliation quietly decides which kinds of problems the Senate addresses, and which it ignores, years after year. Both House and Senate Democrats have said that their first bill will be the “For The People Act,” a package making it easier and safer to vote, and weakening the power big donors wield in politics by matching small donor donations at a 6:1 rate. But the “For The People Act” can’t pass through the budget reconciliation process, so it’s a dead letter.
“Why should it only take a simple majority to do tax cuts for the rich but it takes a supermajority to address the integrity of our elections?” Senator Jeff Merkley, a Democrat from Oregon, told me. “That makes no sense. Access to the ballot shouldn’t have a higher hurdle than helping the rich get richer.” But in today’s Senate, it does. The same is true for gun control or immigration reform.
But budget reconciliation doesn’t just alter liberal priorities. Social conservatives often complain that when Republicans hold Congress, their legislative asks are shunted aside for tax cuts and health care repeal laws. That is, in part, a budget reconciliation issue: You can pass tax cuts and (partially) repeal Obamacare through budget reconciliation. You cannot regulate pornography or push school prayer through the process.
You can also only do a limited number of budget reconciliation packages each fiscal year. That forces legislators to craft giant bills that jam every legislative priority into one rushed package, rather than crafting one bill, debating and modifying it, and then passing it and moving onto the next.
“I find it ironic that people suggest reconciliation is somehow better for the institution,” Adam Jentleson, former deputy chief of staff to the former Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, and the author of the excellent new book, “Kill Switch: The Rise of the Modern Senate and the Crippling of American Democracy,” told me. “It’s terrible for the Senate!” As he notes, budget reconciliation decreases the power of committees and increases the power of the Senate leadership, “since leadership drives the assembly line for putting together these mega-packages. There’s no transparency and it creates a field day for lobbyists.”
In 2012, Steven Teles, a political scientist at Johns Hopkins University, published a paper arguing that American public policy had become defined by kludges. “The term comes out of the world of computer programming, where a kludge is an inelegant patch put in place to be backward compatible with the rest of a system,” he wrote. “When you add up enough kludges, you get a very complicated program, one that is hard to understand and subject to crashes. In other words, Windows.”
Or, the Senate. The modern use of budget reconciliation is a kludge. The institution has become paralyzed by the filibuster and rather than rewriting its rules to solve that problem, senators have instead patched it through budget reconciliation. The Senate gets just enough done that no one can say it is actually impossible to pass big bills through the body. But budget reconciliation narrows the range of problems Congress can solve, the number of bills it can pass and the policy mechanisms it can use. No one would ever design a legislative body that worked this way, but this is how the Senate has come to work, one kludge on top of another. “For any particular problem we have arrived at the most Gerry-rigged, opaque and complicated response,” Teles wrote. That is both an apt description of today’s Senate and of the kind of policy budget reconciliation produces.
All of this is a choice. Every Senate rule can be changed by a simple majority vote. A simple majority could end or reform the filibuster — as we saw when Democrats ended it for most executive branch nominations and most judicial nominations in 2013, and when Republicans ended it for Supreme Court nominees in 2017. The details quickly get complicated, but a simple majority of senators could vote to loosen some of the limits on budget reconciliation, as Senator Bernie Sanders, the new chair of the Budget Committee, has suggested. The Senate is bound by nothing but its own convictions.
But this is a Senate that, collectively, has no convictions. It does not believe enough in the filibuster’s 60-vote threshold to simply abide by it. It does not believe enough in passing bills by a simple majority to make that the standard. It is the self-styled moderates, like Manchin and Sinema, who freeze the institution in dysfunction, but there is nothing moderate about the modern Senate: It is radical in its inanity, a legislative chamber designed by dadaists.
“Democrats have an opportunity to restore our democracy and deliver on the promises they campaigned on,” the Rev. Dr. Stephany Rose Spaulding, founder of Truth and Conciliation, told me by email. “But they can’t do that without breaking down structural barriers to progress — that starts with eliminating the filibuster. If we allow the filibuster to block voting rights, gun violence prevention, Covid relief and more, we’re sending a clear message to millions of voters that their votes and voices don’t count in our democracy.”
To be clear, if Democrats will not get rid of the filibuster, it is better that they use budget reconciliation than that they fail the American people totally. But the fact that Democrats are using budget reconciliation at all is evidence that even Sinema and Manchin know the filibuster has gone too far, that the chamber cannot operate under supermajority rules, all of the time.
This is a terrible way to legislate. Enough with kludges. End the filibuster, and make the Senate great again.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); APPROPRIATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (73%); Senate (%); Federal Budget (US) (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Law and Legislation (%)
 Industry: BUDGETS (91%); US OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT (89%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); KYRSTEN SINEMA (79%); JOE MANCHIN (58%); ROBERT BYRD (58%); Biden, Joseph R Jr
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: February 10, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats, Here's How to Lose in 2022
The New York Times
January 24, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 3608 words
Byline: By Ezra Klein
Body




President Biden takes office with a ticking clock. The Democrats' margin in the House and Senate couldn't be thinner, and midterms typically raze the governing party. That gives Democrats two years to govern. Two years to prove that the American political system can work. Two years to show Trumpism was an experiment that need not be repeated.
Two years. 
  This is the responsibility the Democratic majority must bear: If they fail or falter, they will open the door for Trumpism or something like it to return, and there is every reason to believe it will be far worse next time. To stop it, Democrats need to reimagine their role. They cannot merely defend the political system. They must rebuild it.
  ''This is a fight not just for the future of the Democratic Party or good policy,'' Senator Bernie Sanders told me. ''It is literally a fight to restore faith in small-d democratic government.''
  Among the many tributaries flowing into Trumpism, one in particular has gone dangerously overlooked. In their book ''Presidents, Populism and the Crisis of Democracy,'' the political scientists William Howell and Terry Moe write that ''populists don't just feed on socioeconomic discontent. They feed on ineffective government -- and their great appeal is that they claim to replace it with a government that is effective through their own autocratic power.''
  Donald Trump was this kind of populist. Democrats mocked his ''I alone can fix it'' message for its braggadocio and feared its authoritarianism, but they did not take seriously the deep soil in which it was rooted: The American system of governance is leaving too many Americans to despair and misery, too many problems unsolved, too many people disillusioned. It is captured by corporations and paralyzed by archaic rules. It is failing, and too many Democrats treat its failures as regrettable inevitabilities rather than a true crisis.
  But now Democrats have another chance. To avoid the mistakes of the past, three principles should guide their efforts. First, they need to help people fast and visibly. Second, they need to take politics seriously, recognizing that defeat in 2022 will result in catastrophe. The Trumpist Republican Party needs to be politically discredited through repeated losses; it cannot simply be allowed to ride back to primacy on the coattails of Democratic failure. And, finally, they need to do more than talk about the importance of democracy. They need to deepen American democracy.
  The good news is that Democrats have learned many of these lessons, at least in theory. The $1.9 trillion rescue plan Biden proposed is packed with ideas that would make an undeniable difference in people's lives, from $1,400 checks to paid leave to the construction of a national coronavirus testing infrastructure that will allow some semblance of normal life to resume.
  And congressional Democrats have united behind sweeping legislation to expand American democracy. The ''For the People Act,'' which House Democrats passed in 2019 and Senate Democrats have said will be their first bill in the new session, would do more to protect and expand the right to vote than any legislation passed since the Great Society, and it would go a long way toward building a fairer and more transparent campaign financing system. In June, House Democrats passed a bill to grant statehood to Washington, D.C., which would end one of the most appalling cases of systematic disenfranchisement in the country.
  ''It's time for boldness, for there is so much to do,'' Biden said in his Inaugural Address. ''This is certain, I promise you: We will be judged, you and I, by how we resolve these cascading crises of our era.''
  But none of these bills will pass a Senate in which the filibuster forces 60-vote supermajorities on routine legislation. And that clarifies the real question Democrats face. They have plenty of ideas that could improve people's lives and strengthen democracy. But they have, repeatedly, proved themselves more committed to preserving the status quo of the political system than fulfilling their promises to voters. They have preferred the false peace of decorum to the true progress of democracy. If they choose that path again, they will lose their majority in 2022, and they will deserve it.
  Just Help People
  The last time Democrats won the White House, the Senate and the House was in 2008, and they didn't squander the moment. They passed the stimulus and Obamacare and Dodd-Frank. They saved the auto industry and prevented a second Great Depression and, for good measure, drove the largest investment in clean energy infrastructure in American history.
  But too little of their work was evident in 2010, when Democrats were running for re-election. The result was, as President Barack Obama put it, ''a shellacking.'' Democrats lost six Senate seats and 63 House seats. They also lost 20 state legislatures, giving Republicans control of the decennial redistricting process.
  Democrats have less margin for error in 2021 than they did in 2009. Their congressional majorities are smaller -- 50 seats in the Senate versus 60, and 222 seats in the House versus 257. Republican dominance of redistricting efforts, and a growing Senate and Electoral College bias toward red states, has tilted the electoral map against them. The nationalization of politics has shrunk ticket-splitting voters down to a marginal phenomenon, making it harder for red and purple state Democrats to separate themselves from the fortunes of the national party.
  In 2009, Democrats might reasonably have believed they had a few election cycles in which to govern, to tweak their bills and programs, to see the fruits of their governance. In 2021, no such illusion is possible.
  Tom Perriello is the executive director of U.S. programs at the Open Society Foundations. But in 2009, he was a newly elected Democratic representative from Virginia's Fifth Congressional District, where he'd narrowly beaten a Republican. Two years later, Republicans took back his seat. They still hold it. Democrats cannot allow a wipeout in 2022 like they suffered in 2010, and looking back, Perriello told me what he thought Democrats could've done to save his seat.
  ''There's a belief among a certain set of Democrats that taking an idea and cutting it in half makes it a better idea when it just makes it a worse idea,'' he said. As we talked, he ticked off the examples: The stimulus bill was whittled down and down, ending far beneath what economists thought necessary to rescue the economy. The House's more populist health reform bill -- which included a public option, heftier subsidies and was primarily financed by taxing the rich -- was cast aside in favor of the Senate's stingier, more complex proposal. The House passed ''cramdown'' legislation, which would have allowed bankruptcy judges to alter the terms of mortgages so banks took losses and homeowners would have been more likely to keep their homes, but the bill failed in the Senate, and the impression took hold -- correctly -- that Congress was bailing out the banks, but not desperate homeowners.
  The Obama administration believed that if you got the policy right, the politics would follow. That led, occasionally, to policies that almost entirely abandoned politics, so deep ran the faith in clever design. The Making Work Pay tax credit, which was a centerpiece of the 2009 Recovery Act, was constructed to be invisible -- the Obama administration, working off new research in behavioral economics, believed Americans would be more likely to spend a windfall that they didn't know they got. ''When all was said and done, only around 10 percent of people who received benefits knew they had received something from the government,'' said Suzanne Mettler, a political scientist at Cornell. You don't get re-elected for things voters don't know you did.
  Nor do you get re-elected for legislation voters cannot yet feel. The Affordable Care Act didn't begin delivering health insurance on a mass scale until four years after the bill's passage. That reflected a doomed effort to win Republican support by prioritizing private insurance and a budgetary gimmick meant to keep the total price tag under $1 trillion over 10 years. Obamacare eventually became a political winner for Democrats, but it took the better part of a decade. A simpler, faster, more generous bill would have been better politics and better policy.
  ''Democrats are famous for 87-point programs which sometimes do some good but nobody understands what they are,'' Senator Sanders said. ''What we need to do now is, in very bold and clear ways, make people understand government is directly improving their lives.''
  That's particularly important in a time of fractured media, polarized parties and widespread disinformation. Democrats cannot rely on widely trusted media figures or civic leaders to validate their programs. Policy has to speak for itself and it has to speak clearly.
  ''The wisdom from much of the political science research is that partisanship trumps everything,'' said Amy Lerman, a political scientist at the University of California at Berkeley, and author of ''Good Enough for Government Work.'' ''But one of the insights from the policy feedback literature in particular is that when people experience policy, they don't necessarily experience it as partisans. They experience it as a parent sending their child to school or a patient visiting a doctor, not as a Democrat or Republican. And because people are often thinking in nonpolitical terms during their day-to-day lives, they are much more open to having their views changed when they see the actual, tangible benefits of a policy in their lives. It's a way of breaking through partisanship.''
  Make the Senate Great Again
  President Biden's agenda will live or die in the Senate. Odds are it will die, killed by the filibuster.
  The modern Senate has become something the founders never intended: a body where only a supermajority can govern. From 1941 to 1970, the Senate took only 36 votes to break filibusters. In 2009 and 2010 alone, they took 91. Here's the simple truth facing the Democratic agenda: In a Senate without a filibuster, Democrats have some chance of passing some rough facsimile of the agenda they've promised. In a Senate with a filibuster, they do not.
  ''I've said to the president-elect, 'reach out across the aisle. Try to work with the Republicans. But don't let them stymie your program,''' Representative Jim Clyburn, the House majority whip, told me before Inauguration Day. ''You can't allow the search for bipartisanship to ruin the mandate the American people gave you.'''
  This is a lesson the Obama administration learned the hard way. Tellingly, both Obama and Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader at the beginning of the Obama administration, have come to support the elimination of the filibuster. ''It's not a question of if the filibuster will be gone, but when it'll be gone,'' Reid told me by phone. ''You cannot have a democratic body where it takes 60 percent of the vote to get anything done.''
  When I asked Biden, during the campaign, about filibuster reform, he was reluctant, but not definitively opposed. ''I think it's going to depend on how obstreperous they'' -- meaning Republicans -- ''become, and if they become that way,'' he replied. ''I have not supported the elimination of the filibuster because it has been used as often to protect rights I care about as the other way around. But you're going to have to take a look at it.''
  Senate Democrats could eliminate the filibuster if every single one of them wanted to, but even a single defection would doom them. Senator Joe Manchin has promised to be that defection. Mere days after the election, he went on Fox News and said, ''I commit to you tonight, and I commit to all of your viewers and everyone else that's watching. I want to allay those fears, I want to rest those fears for you right now because when they talk about whether it be packing the courts, or ending the filibuster, I will not vote to do that.''
  Red state Democrats like Manchin have long held to a political strategy in which public opposition to their party's initiatives proves their independence and moderation. And there was a time when that strategy could work. But the nationalized, polarized structure of modern American politics has ended it.
  Ticket-splitting has been on a sharp decline for decades, and it has arguably reached a nearly terminal point. According to calculations by the Democratic data analyst David Shor, the correlation between the statewide vote for Senate Democrats and the statewide vote for the Democratic presidential candidate was 71 percent in 2008. High, which is why Obama's sagging approval ratings hurt Democrats so badly in 2010, but there was still some room to maneuver. But by 2016, it was 93.2 percent. And in 2020, it was 94.5 percent. With few exceptions -- and Manchin, admittedly, has been one -- Democrats live or die together. They certainly win or lose the majority together.
  To give Manchin his due, a more high-minded fear -- shared by others in his caucus -- is that we have just come through a long, ugly period of partisan norm-breaking. Surely the answer to Trump's relentless assaults on decorum, to Mitch McConnell's rewriting of Senate rules, is a return to the comity they cast off, to the traditions they've violated, to the bipartisanship they abandoned. A version of this may appeal to Biden, too: Trump stretched the boundaries of executive authority, so perhaps he should retreat, offering more deference to Congress and resisting opportunities to go it alone, even when stymied by Republicans. But if this is what he means by ''unity,'' it will just empower the merchants of division.
  In their book, Howell and Moe write that this is a common, but dangerously counterproductive, response to populist challengers. Defenders of the political system, eager to show that normalcy has returned, often embrace the very defects and dysfunctions that gave rise to the populist leader in the first place. The nightmare scenario is that Trump is defeated, driven from office, and that augurs in an era when even less appears to get done, as Biden submits to congressional paralysis while embracing a calmer communications strategy. If Democrats permit that to happen, they will pave the road for the next Trump-like politician, one who will be yet more disciplined and dangerous than Trump.
  Democrats for Democracy
  ''Democracy is precious,'' Biden said at his inauguration. ''Democracy is fragile. And at this hour, my friends, democracy has prevailed.''
  It's a stirring sentiment, but wrong. Democracy barely survived. If America actually abided by normal democratic principles, Trump would have lost in 2016, after receiving almost three million fewer votes than Hillary Clinton. The American people did not want this presidency, but they got it anyway, and the result was carnage. In 2020, Trump lost by about seven million votes, but if about 40,000 votes had switched in key states, he would have won anyway. The Senate is split 50-50, but the 50 Democrats represent more than 41 million more Americans than the 50 Republicans. This is not a good system.
  Democracy is designed as a feedback loop. Voters choose leaders. Leaders govern. Voters judge the results, and they either return the leaders to power, or give their opponents a chance. That feedback loop is broken in American politics. It is broken because of gerrymandering, because of the Senate, because of the filibuster, because of the Electoral College, because we have declared money to be speech and allowed those with wealth to speak much more loudly than those without.
  It is also broken because we directly disenfranchise millions of Americans. In the nation's capital, 700,000 residents have no vote in the House or Senate at all. The same is true in Puerto Rico, which, with 3.2 million residents, is larger than 20 existing states. For decades, Democrats promised to offer statehood to residents of both territories, but have never followed through. It is no accident that these are parts of the country largely populated by Black and Hispanic voters. If Democrats believe anything they have said over the past year about combating structural racism and building a multiethnic democracy, then it is obvious where they must start.
  ''It would be a devastating civil rights failure if we didn't achieve statehood now,'' Stasha Rhodes, the campaign director of 51 for 51, which advocates D.C. statehood, told me. ''It would also be a sign that Democrats are not interested in restoring and strengthening American democracy. We can no longer say Republicans are anti-democracy when we now have a chance to restore and create the democracy we say is important, and then we don't do it.''
  After Representative John Lewis died, Obama used his eulogy to address those in Congress who called Lewis a hero but allowed the rights to which he had devoted his life to wither. ''You want to honor John? Let's honor him by revitalizing the law that he was willing to die for. And by the way, naming it the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, that is a fine tribute.'' And, he continued, ''if all this takes is eliminating the filibuster -- another Jim Crow relic -- in order to secure the God-given rights of every American, then that's what we should do.''
  Democracy is worth fighting for, not least because it's the fight that will decide all the others. ''One of the things a Trump administration has shown is that democracy is inextricably linked to the things that matter to Americans,'' Rhodes said. ''The rules are not separate from the issues. If you want effective Covid response, if you want robust gun violence prevention, if you want a strong economy, then you need a true American democracy.''
  The Vaccine Opportunity
  Great presidencies -- and new political eras -- are born of crises. Thus far, America has bobbled its vaccination rollout. But the fault doesn't lie only with Trump. In blue states where Democrats command both power and resources, like California and New York, overly restrictive eligibility criteria slowed the rollout, and huge numbers of shots were locked in freezers. It's an embarrassment.
  A successful mass immunization campaign will save lives, supercharge the economy and allow us to hug our families and see our friends again. Few presidents, outside the worst of wartime, have entered office with as much opportunity to better people's lives immediately through competent governance.
  Biden's team understands that. Their $20 billion plan to use the full might of the federal government to accelerate vaccinations hits all the right notes. But it's attached to their $1.9 trillion rescue plan, which needs 10 Republican votes it doesn't have in order to pass over a filibuster (Senator Mitt Romney already dismissed it as ''not well-timed''). Letting the resources required to vaccinate the country -- and to set up mass testing and to prevent an economic crisis -- become entangled in Republican obstruction for weeks or months would be a terrible mistake.
  Here, too, Democrats will quickly face a choice: To leave their promises to the American people to the mercies of Mitch McConnell, or to change the Senate so they can change the course of the country.
  Some, at least, say they've learned their lesson. ''I'm going to do everything I can to bring people together,'' said Senator Ron Wyden, who will lead the powerful Senate Finance Committee, ''but I'm not just going to stand around and do nothing while Mitch McConnell ties everyone up in knots.'' They will all need to be united on this point for it to matter.
  In her book ''Good Enough for Government Work,'' Lerman argues that the U.S. government is caught in a reputation crisis where its poor performance is assumed, the public is attuned to its flaws and misses its virtues, and fed-up citizens stop using public services, which further harms the quality of those services. The Trump years add another dimension to the analysis: Frustration with a government that doesn't solve problems leads people to vote for demagogic outsiders who create further crises. But this is not an inevitability. Her titular phrase, she notes, ''originated during World War II to describe the exacting standards and high quality required by government.'' It was only in the 1960s and '70s that it became a slur.
  It is no accident that World War II led to the idea that government work was a standard to strive for, not an outcome to fear. Crises remind us of what government is for in the first place. Biden has an extraordinary opportunity to change the relationship between the people and their government. If he succeeds, he will not only deprive authoritarian populists like Trump of energy, he will give Democrats a chance to win over voters who've lost faith in them, and he will give voice to millions more that the American political system has silenced. ''The best thing we can do right now to reduce levels of anger and frustration on both sides of the aisle is to give people the things they need to live better lives,'' said Lerman.
  In other words, what Democrats need to do is simple: Just help people, and do it fast.
             
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); POPULISM (90%); TRUMPISM (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (73%); CORONAVIRUSES (50%); VIRUSES (50%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); BERNIE SANDERS (58%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: January 24, 2021

 

End of Document
End the Senate Filibuster
The New York Times
January 1, 2021 Friday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18; LETTERS
Length: 318 words
Body




A reader writes that our very democracy is at stake. Also: New Year's resolutions.
To the Editor: 
  Re '''The Senate Is Broken,' Udall Says in Farewell'' (news article, Dec. 9):
  Senator Tom Udall said in his farewell address that the filibuster has caused ''a deep paralysis.'' If even a few Democratic senators refuse to back filibuster reform, the result may be not just further legislative paralysis but the loss of our democracy itself.
  Republicans have spent the last decade rigging our election processes to entrench minority rule and prevent government from responding to the will of the people. They have relentlessly attempted to keep people opposed to them from voting, manipulated district lines to maintain legislative majorities, and protected and encouraged the flow of big money, which warps our political priorities and erodes trust in government.
  Our nation desperately needs legislation to ensure free and fair elections and to end the influence of big donors. These reforms have passed the House in the For the People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. But there will never be enough Senate Republicans willing to join Democrats to reach the 60-vote threshold needed to break a filibuster on these bills because too many Republicans will simply never agree to unrig a system that keeps them in power.
  If we don't act to save our democracy when we have the chance, we may lose it forever. I can only hope that if it comes down to saving the filibuster or saving our democracy, the choice will be clear.
  Daniel A. SimonNew York
  The Name That Shall Not Be Spoken
  To the Editor:
  For what it's worth, here are my three New Year's resolutions for 2021: Obey what the medical profession instructs us to do to overcome Covid-19, promote a return to civility and never utter the name of our soon-to-be ex-president.
  Happy New Year to one and all!
  Herb StarkMooresville, N.C.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Letter
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (95%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); ELECTIONS (78%); RIGHT TO FREE ELECTIONS (75%); ELECTION FRAUD (70%); RIGHT TO VOTE (70%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (62%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (50%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (50%)
 Person: TOM UDALL (73%); JOHN LEWIS (55%)
 Load-Date: January 2, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats Are About to Control Congress. What Will They Do?
The New York Times 
January 19, 2021 Tuesday 19:21 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 2032 words
Byline: Spencer Bokat-Lindell
Highlight: For the first time in a decade, they have the power to transform the country.
Body




For the first time in a decade, they have the power to transform the country.
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
The stakes of the two Senate elections that occurred in Georgia two weeks ago, in the words of former President Barack Obama, could scarcely have been higher: Even before President-elect Joe Biden defeated President Trump in November, political analysts were warning that his F.D.R.-style agenda would never be realized as long as Republicans held the Senate reins.
But after weeks of anticipation, voters in Georgia wrested them away, handing Democrats the most power they’ve had in a decade. What will Democrats do with the legislature they will within days control? Here’s what people are saying.
The givens
The most immediate consequence of a Democratic Senate is that Mr. Biden will now be able to quickly staff his administration and appoint judicial nominees with only a simple majority — the filibuster rule no longer applies to such votes — affording him more time for the actual business of governing.
“We won’t know to what extent Republicans would’ve blocked judicial and executive-branch nominations had Mitch McConnell remained the majority leader, but all the evidence suggests they wouldn’t have held back,” Jonathan Bernstein writes in Bloomberg. “Now Biden’s nominees will only be subject to the kind of foot-dragging that Democrats used against Trump’s picks, not full-out blockades.”
Perhaps most important, Senate Republicans will not be able to block the president from filling vacancies in the federal courts, including the Supreme Court, as they did during the Obama administration. For that reason, some Democrats are already pushing for the retirement of Justice Stephen Breyer, who is one of three left-leaning members of the Supreme Court and, at 82, its oldest.
“Justice Breyer’s service on the court has been remarkable, and history will remember him even more fondly if he ends up playing a critical role in ensuring the appointment of the first Black woman to the court,” Brian Fallon, a co-founder and the executive director of Demand Justice, told Politico. “Timing his retirement in the coming year would guarantee that opportunity, and it would be wise to do so because the window may prove a narrow one.”
The big agenda items in reach
Even with a majority in Congress, Mr. Biden’s agenda still risks being stymied by the Senate filibuster, an institutional tactic that effectively raises the threshold for passing most bills to 60 votes from 51 votes. “If Democrats decide — and it is crucial to say that it would be a decision, a choice — to leave the 60-vote threshold in place, that entire agenda, and far more beyond it, is dead,” my colleague Ezra Klein wrote in October at Vox.
Whether Senate Democrats will vote to abolish the filibuster is still an open question. But for now, Democrats plan to circumvent the filibuster through a process known as budget reconciliation, which can be used to pass certain kinds of legislation by a simple majority. The process has provided the mechanism for several major legislative efforts in the past two decades, including tax cuts under President Trump and President George W. Bush, and the final version of the Affordable Care Act in 2010.
The reconciliation process will be overseen for at least the next two years by Senator Bernie Sanders, the new chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, who told The Times that he plans to be “aggressive” in realizing the progressive program Mr. Biden campaigned on.
As Dylan Matthews points out at Vox, however, budget reconciliation has its limits: It cannot be used for noneconomic purposes, and because it is necessarily tied to yearly budget resolutions, Democrats will have at most three opportunities to take advantage of it before the 2022 midterm elections. “Still,” Mr. Matthews writes, “it’s plausible that Biden and his allies in Congress can use budget reconciliation to accomplish large swaths of his agenda.”
Economic relief: Democrats, including Mr. Biden, campaigned in Georgia on the promise that if they retook the Senate, they would immediately seek to increase the stimulus checks that Congress ordered in December to $2,000 per person from $600, an idea that Mr. Trump supported but that Mr. McConnell refused to put to a vote on the Senate floor.
On Thursday, Mr. Biden announced his proposal for a $1.9 trillion relief package to make good on that promise: On top of the $1,400 direct payments, it includes generous unemployment benefits, federally mandated paid leave at least through September for workers and large subsidies for child care costs, along with more than $400 billion to accelerate vaccine deployment and $350 billion to help make up for state and local governments’ budget shortfalls.
Mr. Biden plans to unveil another set of spending proposals in February that is said to focus on job creation and infrastructure, clean-energy projects, health care and education.
Student debt: Absent from Mr. Biden’s economic proposal was any plan to address the $1.7 trillion in student loan debt that Americans hold. Because the bulk of that debt falls under the purview of the Department of Education, activists, legal scholars and lawmakers have argued that the president has broad authority to cancel it himself.
Mr. Biden has so far resisted this idea, instead favoring congressional legislation that cancels up to $10,000 in federal student debt per borrower. In the meantime, he is reportedly planning to extend the existing moratorium on student loan payments and interest.
Climate change: Last summer, Mr. Biden debuted an ambitious $2 trillion climate plan that promised to put the country on “an irreversible path to achieve net-zero emissions, economy-wide, by no later than 2050” while also remedying economic and racial inequality.
There are some regulatory components of Mr. Biden’s plan, such as a binding mandate to decarbonize the power sector by 2035, that may be able to pass only with 60 votes in the Senate. But even those features of Mr. Biden’s plan could still be enacted through budget reconciliation, argues Sam Ricketts, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress. “Number one, it’s an investment agenda, and reconciliation is fundamentally about spending and taxing,” he said.
Democratic control of the Senate will also make it possible to reverse the Trump administration’s rollback of environmental regulationsthrough the Congressional Review Act via a simple majority, David Malakoff explains in Science.
Taxes: During his campaign, Mr. Biden promised to expand tax credits for low-income people while raising taxes on the wealthy, corporations and estates to generate $4 trillion over 10 years.
“Biden will have a relatively easy time pushing through tax cuts he has proposed for modest earners and the middle class, such as expanding the child tax credit for the duration of the economic crisis, and permanent tax cuts to ease the burden of paying for health insurance, child care and a first home,” Yeganeh Torbati writes in The Washington Post. But when it comes to raising taxes on the wealthy and corporations, he may face pushback from conservative Democrats.
Health care: Proposals that aim to overhaul the country’s health insurance system, such as the creation of a public option that Mr. Biden has called for — to say nothing of the kind of Medicare-for-all plan progressives have championed — are likely to remain out of reach, my colleagues Sarah Kliff and Margot Sanger-Katz explain.
But a good deal of Mr. Biden’s health care plan — lowering the Medicare eligibility age to 60 from 65, expanding subsidies for the Affordable Care Act and extending coverage to low-income Americans in the 14 states that haven’t expanded Medicaid — are theoretically achievable via reconciliation.
The longer shots
As long as the filibuster exists, some of the most significant elements of the Democratic Party’s agenda are still likely to remain out of reach. Here are a few:
•	Banning the production of assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.
•	Expanding the number of seats on the federal and appellate courts and the Supreme Court.
•	Passing the comprehensive immigration legislation that Mr. Biden reportedly plans to introduce that would create a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million unauthorized immigrants living in the country.
•	Granting Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico statehood.
•	Enacting the For the People Act, a sweeping package of proposals passed by the House in 2019 that would, among other reforms, shore up and expand voting rights, ban partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts, strengthen anti-corruption laws and restrain the influence of big money in politics by establishing public financing for elections.
The last two items, in particular, would be necessary, if not sufficient, to offset the growing structural disadvantages that Democrats face in Congress. “With Democrats unlikely to get a 60-vote majority anytime soon,” Mr. Matthews writes, “that could mean the party’s structural problems will just keep getting worse.”
That prospect is one reason a growing number of Democrats, including Mr. Obama, have begun calling for the filibuster’s elimination. As Sven Steinmo and Jon Watts wrote in an influential 1995 academic article, “no other democratic system in the world requires support of 60 percent of legislators to pass government policy.”
The idea of doing away with this requirement has met resistance from conservative and progressive Democrats alike: “Having just lived through being in the minority and how destructive the 51-vote threshold has been for Supreme Court justices, I just want to think long and hard about it,” Senator Kirsten Gillibrand told Politico in 2019. More recently, however, both Senator Charles Schumer, the incoming majority leader, and Mr. Biden, who in years past defended the filibuster, have signaled their openness to eliminating it if, as Mr. Biden put it over the summer, there’s no other way to move.
Whatever positions Democrats have staked out before, the debate is almost certain to take on new salience having now exited the realm of the theoretical. “With unified Democratic control of government, there should be no excuses for bad or inadequate policy,” the political analyst Matt Bruenig tweeted. “They can get whatever they want done. If they don’t, it’s because at least some of them don’t want to.”
Do you have a point of view we missed? Email us at debatable@nytimes.com. Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); PATENT COURTS (79%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); APPOINTMENTS (77%); JUDGES (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); debatable (%); Democratic Party (%); Senate (%)
 Person: BARACK OBAMA (89%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); MITCH MCCONNELL (58%); STEPHEN BREYER (52%)
 Load-Date: January 21, 2021

 

End of Document
Money in Politics, One Month Later; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
February 6, 2021 Saturday 10:21 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 2082 words
Byline: Ephrat Livni, Lauren Hirsch and Andrew Ross Sorkin
Highlight: Since the Capitol riot, companies have re-evaluated their political donations. Will this be a turning point or a momentary blip?
Body




Since the Capitol riot, companies have re-evaluated their political donations. Will this be a turning point or a momentary blip?
It’s been one month since a mob stormed the Capitol, which led to soul-searching about the influence of money in politics (among other things). The DealBook newsletter delves into a single topic or theme every weekend, and today we look at how corporate cash became such a feature of the system, what’s changed since the riot and what it means for the future.
Money talks
One month ago, the riot at the U.S. Capitol delayed but did not derail the process of certifying the presidential election. The shocking scenes did, however, prompt a reckoning about money in politics that persists, and could significantly alter the way companies and candidates interact.
Or not. It will take more than a month to see whether Jan. 6, 2021, signified a meaningful turning point or a momentary swerve from the status quo.
The most immediate change since the riot is that hundreds of big companies halted their donations to the lawmakers who objected to the vote certification, the motivating event for the mob in Washington. Many companies paused political giving altogether.
The thing is, these corporate political action committees account for a sliver of the cash that flows into politics. “If you are a corporate political spender, there are so many avenues,” said Ciara Torres-Spelliscy, a law professor at Stetson University and the author of books on campaign finance law. Because the money trail goes dark along many of these avenues, with groups disguising or not disclosing their donors, even something as seemingly momentous as the Capitol riot may not have a lasting impact.
Unless, that is, companies are rethinking donation policies beyond the limited measures discussed to date, pressure from stakeholders forces bigger changes, or lawmakers decide to dismantle the system that has proved so lucrative to their campaigns and causes over the years. — Ephrat Livni
History lesson: How companies found their voice
•	1819: The Supreme Court wrote that a corporation was an “immortal being” that existed “only in contemplation of the law” but still required certain legal protections.
•	1907: The Tillman Act prohibited direct contributions from corporations to candidates. It’s still intact.
•	1971: The Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA), amended in 1974 after Watergate, mandated donor disclosures and created campaign contribution and spending limits. The reporting requirements remain intact. The spending limits do not.
•	1976: FECA’s limits were challenged as violating free speech. The Supreme Court decided that restricting contributions preserved the “integrity of our system of representative democracy,” but that the act’s spending limits were too severe. This laid the groundwork for interpretations that money is speech.
•	2010: In the Citizens United case, the Supreme Court gave corporations a First Amendment right to speak politically, using money. As a result, companies could raise and spend unlimited funds on “independent expenditures” as long as they didn’t coordinate with candidates or give directly to campaigns. In response, so-called super PACs and nonprofits sprang up to collect corporate cash for political purposes. In the 2020 election cycle, more than 2,000 super PACs spent $2.1 billion.
Corporate PACs: Press pause
The Capitol riot has forced companies to explain the reasons for their political spending, and deal with the consequences of their candor. This is especially true for the companies that announced a pause in donations from their political action committees.
Corporate PACs don’t spend company money, but collect donations from employees and direct how they are spent, with a limit of $10,000 per candidate in an election year. That’s a drop in the bucket, relatively speaking, but because this activity must be conducted out in the open, it attracts public scrutiny.
Executives are comparing notes to decide what to do next about their corporate PACs. How to support candidates on issues of importance to the company without endorsing their other positions that may go against corporate values? Are direct donations really worth it?
Within days of the riot, Morgan Stanley singled out the 147 members of Congress, all Republicans, who challenged the election count for its pause in corporate PAC donations. It took this targeted approach after consulting its government relations, legal and compliance teams, as well as senior managers including the chief executive, James Gorman, a person familiar with the matter said. In recent weeks, the bank’s large wealth management arm has seen some pushback from clients threatening to take their business elsewhere, the person said.
Microsoft, which initially halted all donations and held a series of meetings with employees, announced Friday that it would suspend donations to those who voted against certifying the election, as well as state officials and organizations who “supported such objections.” The tech giant also said it would “promote and join a conversation with other businesses” about “strengthening democracy.”
The companies whose donations are all still on an indefinite pause, like BlackRock, Coca-Cola and Hilton, are unlikely to avoid having to take further action. Democrats have hinted that they won’t look favorably on companies that cut them off after the riot. At the same time, it’s a big step to shun top Republicans like Kevin McCarthy, the party’s leader in the House, who voted against the election certification.
Shareholders, sensing a new source of risk to their investments, are also planning resolutions for upcoming annual meetings calling for greater disclosure of political spending.
The simplest solution might be to forgo PAC donations entirely. So far, only Charles Schwab has closed its PAC since the riot.
“We’ve got to find a way to participate in the right way,” said Doug McMillon, Walmart’s chief, at a recent meeting of the Business Roundtable, which he chairs. (Walmart has suspended donations to the Republicans who voted against certification.) “I think there’s still a role for business to play,” he said.
All of these announcements represent “a huge acknowledgment that corporations have invested in politics because they think this money makes a difference,” said Jacob Hacker, a political science professor at Yale. “And they think they’re part of the problem.” — Lauren Hirsch
Dark money: ‘Daisy chain’ dilemma
Citizens United removed some spending limits but didn’t dismiss the need for transparency. Disclosures would keep the public informed about corporate influence in politics, the Supreme Court assumed. But workarounds quickly emerged and money found a way to flow undetected.
Super PACs disclose their finances to regulators but can take contributions from nonprofits that don’t have the same reporting requirements or need to publicly disclose their donors. Some of these “social welfare” nonprofits are highly political and allied to both Republican and Democratic causes. Trade groups can also take corporate donations and pass them on to nonprofits or super PACs, obscuring the source of the funds.
Anna Massoglia, an investigative researcher at the Center for Responsive Politics, found that two dozen of the companies that re-evaluated donations after the Capitol riot, including AT&amp;T, CVS and Intel, had given $100 million to these so-called dark money groups since 2015. Over all, dark money groups poured more than $750 million into the 2020 election cycle, with liberal groups accounting for more than conservative ones.
There’s “a daisy chain of laundering,” said Robert Maguire, research director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. This makes it easy for companies to take competing public and private stands: Halting corporate PAC donations while routing money anonymously via other means. “As long as we have this system, there is no way to check,” he said.
The I.R.S. is supposed to scrutinize nonprofits’ designations, ensuring they are what they claim to be. But the feds have been bullied off the beat, the Democratic senators Elizabeth Warren and Sheldon Whitehouse said in a letter to Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen this week.
The I.R.S. was “cowed from regulating” after administrators faced the wrath of powerful groups resisting scrutiny and claiming ideological bias, the senators wrote. Among other things, they want the Treasury to step up scrutiny of politically minded nonprofits and to step in on a case the Supreme Court accepted for review just days after the Capitol riot.
The case pits a Koch-affiliated charity promoting “free market values” against California over access to private tax documents that reveal the charity’s “major donors.” More than 20 briefs supporting anonymity were filed, including from trade associations like the United States Chamber of Commerce.
Other efforts to address anonymous spending include the For the People Act, reintroduced in the House last month, which includes a financial disclosure component by Mr. Whitehouse intended to give citizens “the information they need to do the work of democracy in the daylight,” he told DealBook. And on Jan. 21, the 11th anniversary of the Citizens United decision, a bipartisan group in the House reintroduced a constitutional amendment to “get big money out of politics.”
Will these moves have any effect? Since Democrats control both chambers and the White House, “if they are going to do something, now is the time,” Ms. Torres-Spelliscy of Stetson University said.
“I would like Americans to understand that the system itself can be corrupt,” Mr. Maguire of CREW said, blaming nobody in particular. “Good people cannot be effective in a bad system.” — Ephrat Livni
Big idea: Breaking up the duopoly
The Harvard Business School professor Michael Porter argues in “The Politics Industry,” with his co-author Katherine Gehl, that America’s political parties are “a textbook duopoly.” Their business, so to speak, is thriving financially while failing to satisfy consumers. There are no start-ups presenting a serious competitive threat. From an antitrust perspective, new rules are needed.
“The events of the last weeks and months have been a wake-up call,” Mr. Porter told DealBook. Businesses realize that “whatever they’ve been doing in government is no good,” he said, and they can evolve into “a special interest for the public interest.” By supporting specific causes — like ranked-choice voting to loosen the party grip on primaries — companies could help foster political competition and spur innovation, making government better.
That still leaves the issue of funding. Corporate funds buy influence, and relying on business to embrace a shared civic cause may not suffice. Mr. Porter countered that for the companies that don’t recognize the value in creating a more functional society, the price of getting called out for hypocrisy now is too severe. But exposing hypocrisy also requires being able to follow the money. — Ephrat Livni
Coda: Has anything really changed?
As much as the Capitol riot may have appeared to be a transformational moment, in truth it is more likely to be transitory.
In the wake of the insurrection, companies went into C.Y.A. mode. Yes, many C.E.O.s privately were furious with President Trump and his supporters, but remember that few companies came out publicly and said they would end PAC donations on their own. That happened only after journalists highlighted the donations and started asking questions. Once several companies publicly announced pauses in spending, it became a flood because nobody wanted to be last, as employees started to ask questions.
In my conversations with business leaders involved in these decisions, almost all of them appear to suggest that this is a temporary phenomenon — a reaction to the extraordinary attack we witnessed. Consider how companies distanced themselves from Saudi Arabia in the weeks and months after the journalist Jamal Khashoggi’s murder. Virtually all of them have returned to doing business with the country, both publicly and privately. Memories are short. — Andrew Ross Sorkin

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: CAMPAIGN FINANCE (92%); 2021 US CAPITOL RIOTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIOTS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (77%); ELECTION LAW (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); DEMOCRACIES (73%); WRITERS (73%); APPEALS (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (69%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%); saturdaynewsletter (%); Campaign Finance (%); Political Action Committees (%); Citizens United v Federal Election Commission (Supreme Court Decision) (%); Storming of the US Capitol (Jan, 2021) (%)
 Organization: FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION (59%); STETSON UNIVERSITY (54%)
 Industry: WRITERS (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (69%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%)
 Geographic: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: July 1, 2021

 

End of Document
End the Senate Filibuster; letters
The New York Times 
December 31, 2020 Thursday 23:11 EST

 Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; letters
Length: 347 words
Highlight: A reader writes that our very democracy is at stake. Also: New Year’s resolutions.
Body




A reader writes that our very democracy is at stake. Also: New Year’s resolutions.
To the Editor:
Re “‘The Senate Is Broken,’ Udall Says in Farewell” (news article, Dec. 9):
Senator Tom Udall said in his farewell address that the filibuster has caused “a deep paralysis.” If even a few Democratic senators refuse to back filibuster reform, the result may be not just further legislative paralysis but the loss of our democracy itself.
Republicans have spent the last decade rigging our election processes to entrench minority rule and prevent government from responding to the will of the people. They have relentlessly attempted to keep people opposed to them from voting, manipulated district lines to maintain legislative majorities, and protected and encouraged the flow of big money, which warps our political priorities and erodes trust in government.
Our nation desperately needs legislation to ensure free and fair elections and to end the influence of big donors. These reforms have passed the House in the For the People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. But there will never be enough Senate Republicans willing to join Democrats to reach the 60-vote threshold needed to break a filibuster on these bills because too many Republicans will simply never agree to unrig a system that keeps them in power.
If we don’t act to save our democracy when we have the chance, we may lose it forever. I can only hope that if it comes down to saving the filibuster or saving our democracy, the choice will be clear.
Daniel A. Simon

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Letter
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (96%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); ELECTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); CORONAVIRUSES (77%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (77%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (77%); RIGHT TO FREE ELECTIONS (75%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (72%); ELECTION FRAUD (72%); RIGHT TO VOTE (70%); VIRUSES (57%); United States Politics and Government (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Senate (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Trump, Donald J (%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); TOM UDALL (78%); JOHN LEWIS (57%); Trump, Donald J
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: December 31, 2020

 

End of Document
