
Why Some Black Democrats Haven’t Embraced a Voting Rights Push
The New York Times 
April 26, 2021 Monday 19:53 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1746 words
Byline: Astead W. Herndon
Highlight: In the South, Black Democrats describe a party too slow in combating Republican voting limits. And Black lawmakers are wary that a major elections bill could reduce their power in Congress.
Body




In the South, Black Democrats describe a party too slow in combating Republican voting limits. And Black lawmakers are wary that a major elections bill could reduce their power in Congress.
JACKSON, Miss. — The right to vote is what Frank Figgers fought for in the 1960s as a student at a racially segregated high school in Jackson, Miss. It is what Medgar Evers died for when he was shot to death outside his home in the city in 1963, after his work with the state N.A.A.C.P.
Mr. Figgers, 71, remembers learning about the assassination of Mr. Evers the day it occurred. He remembers the rage it inspired.
“When people say we’re fighting the same stuff, we really are,” he said, sitting in a local Masonic Lodge where Mr. Evers once held an office. “We were fighting in 1865 and 1965. We were fighting it in 2015 and we’re fighting it in 2021.”
Now, as Republican state lawmakers across the country push new restrictions on voting, Democrats are hitting back. In Congress, the party is pushing a colossal elections system overhaul that would take redistricting out of the hands of politicians, introduce automatic voter registration and restore voting rights for the formerly incarcerated.
For some Black Democrats in the South, the fact that this fight is happening at all — in 2021 — is a profound failure of the Democratic Party’s politics and policies. In interviews, more than 20 Southern Democrats and civil rights activists described a party that has been slow to combat Republican gerrymandering and voting limits, overconfident about the speed of progress, and too willing to accept that voter suppression was a thing of the Jim Crow past.
But Black leaders are also facing some unexpected resistance from lawmakers who fear that the sweeping bill in Congress, known as the For the People Act, would endanger their own seats in predominantly Black districts.
Republicans have often used the redistricting method to pack Black Democrats into one House district. The practice has diluted Democrats’ influence regionally, but it also ensures that almost all Southern states have at least one predominantly Black district, offering a guarantee of Black representation amid a sea of mostly white and conservative House districts.
Some Black Democratic lawmakers in the South have so far remained relatively muted about these concerns of self-preservation, worried that it places their own interests above the party’s agenda or activists’ priorities. Still, the doubts flared up last month when Representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, a Democrat whose district includes Jackson and who serves as Mr. Figgers’s congressman, surprisingly voted “no” on the House’s federal elections bill.
Recently, other Congressional Black Caucus members have urged Democratic leadership to focus more narrowly on the John Lewis Voting Rights Act — which aims to restore key parts of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, including the requirement that some states get federal approval before changing election laws — rather than pushing for the sweeping provisions of the For the People Act, officially known as H.R. 1.
Eric H. Holder Jr., who served as attorney general under President Barack Obama, said in a recent interview that Democrats were only now seeking to unify on a strategy, years after Republicans made theirs clear.
“When it came to redistricting, the Democratic response has not been nearly as polished, not nearly as concentrated, was not technologically backed in the way that the Republicans were,” he said.
Representative Mondaire Jones of New York, who was a key ally to Speaker Nancy Pelosi as she built support for the legislation, agreed with the sentiment but placed blame on the Obama administration.
“Democrats absolutely have been late to seeing the urgency of voting rights,” Mr. Jones said. “Had they not been late, we would have done something about it during the Obama administration. We needed H.R. 1 then.”
The For the People Act is set to be one of this summer’s defining clashes in the Senate. The White House will face pressure from its moderate and progressive flanks, and the act will test Senate Democrats’ commitment to the filibuster, the 60-vote threshold that has often stymied legislation in the past.
It remains unclear how far Democrats are willing to go to push through the bill, even after former President Donald J. Trump waged an open war on the results of the last election and as Republicans propose new voter restrictions in more than 40 states. Key Democratic senators like Joe Manchin III, the West Virginia moderate, have expressed skepticism about some parts of the voting bill. The House also has not yet fully passed its companion legislation, the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, or H.R. 4.
To Jackson’s tight-knit voting rights community, members of which view themselves as torchbearers in the mold of Mr. Figgers and Mr. Evers, it’s all evidence of a lingering absence of urgency.
“If the people who were most impacted by this were white people, Democrats would’ve done something about this a long time ago,” said Rukia Lumumba, the executive director of the People’s Advocacy Institute in Jackson. Her brother is the mayor of Jackson and her late father also held that role. “They thought, ‘Oh, that’s just the South,’ and not that what we’ve experienced here was coming to the rest of the country.”
Mr. Holder, who now runs a group that focuses on redistricting and ballot access, said he would encourage senators to eliminate the filibuster to pass the For the People Act, if necessary. His group and its partners plan to spend $30 million to pitch the legislation to voters in states with key senators, including Arizona, Pennsylvania and West Virginia.
“The stakes are the condition of our democracy,” Mr. Holder said. “This is more than a partisan ‘who wins and who loses?’ game. If we are not successful in H.R. 1 or H.R. 4, I am really worried our democracy will be fundamentally and irreparably harmed.”
He added, “We will still have elections every two years or every four years, but they could almost be rendered close to meaningless.”
Mr. Holder has also found himself acting as something of a voting rights ambassador among Democrats: Last month, on a virtual call with the Congressional Black Caucus, he was brought in because several of the caucus’s older members had deep reservations about the For the People Act, according to those familiar with the call’s planning, a rare rift between Democratic leadership and the group often called “the conscience of the Congress.”
In fact, Representative Thompson was the only Democrat to vote against the bill in the House, reversing his stance as a previous co-sponsor. In the weeks since, Mr. Thompson has declined several requests from The New York Times to explain his vote, or to respond to constituents who say it was at odds with Southern Democrats’ rich history of defending Black voting rights.
In a short statement given to Fox News last month, Mr. Thompson said through his office, “My constituents opposed the redistricting portion of the bill as well as the section on public finances.” However, in interviews, members of every major civil rights group in Jackson expressed surprise at his vote, even if they remained deferential to his judgment.
“Of course we noticed that,” said Arekia Bennett, the executive director of the youth-led group Mississippi Votes. “But we’re not certain on his actual reasons.”
Nsombi Lambright-Haynes, who leads one of the region’s top voting rights groups, One Voice, said Mr. Thompson’s civil rights record had earned him the benefit of the doubt.
“We’re wary of talking about it because we just assume we don’t know the full story,” she said.
People familiar with Mr. Thompson’s thinking who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss private conversations said the congressman’s vote reflected the larger fear among some Black elected officials that independent redistricting committees would dilute the makeup of predominantly Black districts like his own. Advocates like Mr. Holder say the concerns about keeping Black districts intact are addressed in the bill.
Mr. Jones, who is part of a wave of new congressional lawmakers who have shaken up the Black caucus, said that any worries about how redistricting affects Black districts were not ideological but generational.
“Congress is a place where members are used to and very comfortable with the status quo, so long as it benefits them electorally,” he said. “If we don’t have a Democratic majority in the Congress, it wouldn’t matter that the Congressional Black Caucus increased its membership to 70.”
In Jackson, meanwhile, the For the People Act could be the difference in restoring voting rights for those disenfranchised because of a previous felony conviction. Groups like One Voice and Mississippi Votes said they were focusing their attention on state voting restrictions, which have proliferated since the Supreme Court’s 2013 decision to remove the Voting Rights Act requirement that several states, mostly in the South, earn federal approval before changing election laws.
“In 2016, when the election results came around, the rest of the country woke up in Mississippi and we woke up to a regular day,” Ms. Bennett said. “And so for us, the fight — whether these bills pass or not — the fights continue. Because we’re in a different war.”
Republicans remain committed to a strategy of enacting voting restrictions through state legislatures. They also have a 10-year head start, given their string of down-ballot successes that continued in 2020.
In Mr. Obama’s administration, Democrats “focused our resources on the presidency, Senate, the House,” Mr. Holder said. “We think of ourselves as a national federal party, without necessarily understanding that there’s a direct connection between federal power and the makeup of the state legislatures and governors at the state level.”
He added, “Secretaries of state, Supreme Court races in the states — you know, there was just not a focus there.”
Ms. Lambright-Haynes paused when told what Mr. Holder had said.
“It’s just really, really sad,” she said. “We’re not able to not see those things here.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: CIVIL RIGHTS (92%); RIGHT TO VOTE (92%); VOTERS & VOTING (92%); ELECTION LAW (91%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); CAUCUSES (89%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); REDISTRICTING (89%); CONSERVATISM (78%); ELECTION REFORM (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); SCHOOL DESEGREGATION (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (73%); Democratic Party (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Voting and Voters (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Black People (%); Law and Legislation (%); Civil Rights and Liberties (%); Congressional Black Caucus (%); Southern States (US) (%)
 Organization: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (57%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); BENNIE THOMPSON (58%); JOHN LEWIS (58%)
 Geographic: JACKSON, MS, USA (92%); MISSISSIPPI, USA (93%); SOUTHEAST USA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: August 17, 2021

 

End of Document
Voting Rights Standoff Stalls Trump-Inspired Ethics Measures
The New York Times 
April 24, 2021 Saturday 00:06 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1572 words
Byline: Elizabeth Williamson
Highlight: After the Trump presidency, democracy activists and many Democrats seized a moment to rebuild constitutional guardrails, but the effort could die in the face of a larger fight over voting rights.
Body




After the Trump presidency, democracy activists and many Democrats seized a moment to rebuild constitutional guardrails, but the effort could die in the face of a larger fight over voting rights.
WASHINGTON — After Donald J. Trump lost the election and was impeached for his role in the Capitol riot, democracy preservation groups pointed with urgency to what they called a last, best chance to address the holes in the Constitution exposed by his presidency.
But a suite of legislative responses, like requiring the release of presidential tax returns and barring presidents from channeling government money to their private businesses, is now hostage in the Senate to a more public fight over voting rights. And competing priorities of President Biden’s may ensure that the moment to fortify constitutional guardrails that Mr. Trump plowed through may already have passed.
Most Democrats and a coalition of watchdog groups say the ethics and voting rights sections in a sprawling Senate bill known as the For the People Act, or S.1., should remain intact and entwined. But solid Republican opposition to the legislation’s voter access proposals threatens less debated elements in the measure, part of what was envisioned to be the most comprehensive ethics overhaul since Watergate.
Even Democratic support for the bill has begun to splinter, as the Congressional Black Caucus and some advocacy groups pivot from the full 800-page legislation to pushing for narrower proposals.
“It’s hard to move many things simultaneously through the Senate, and you have a president who is rightly first focused on Covid relief and next focused on infrastructure,” said Max Stier, who leads the Partnership for Public Service, which champions a more effective federal work force. “I worry that important issues like ethics reform don’t make the cut.”
The measure will undergo changes in a formal drafting on May 11 by the Senate Rules Committee that aims to clarify confusing provisions, conflicting deadlines and redundancies. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, vowed last month to bring the full bill to a vote. “If our democracy doesn’t work, then we have no hope — no hope — of solving any of our other problems,” he said.
The act would expand voting access, curb partisan gerrymandering and curtail the influence of secret donors, special interests and foreign governments in American elections, all hot-button issues that Republican leaders strongly oppose.
“This is clearly an effort by one party to rewrite the rules of our political system,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, said last month in a hearing on the bill. “This legislation would forcibly rewrite the election laws in all 50 states.”
The bill’s presidential ethics section is less contested. Major party candidates for president and vice president would have to release 10 years’ worth of personal and business tax returns. The president’s and vice president’s exemption from executive branch conflict-of-interest rules would end. Presidents would be required to place personal financial holdings in a blind trust or limit them to assets that pose no conflict. And federal spending at businesses owned or controlled by the president, vice president, cabinet or their family members would be tightly controlled.
To guard against a president pressuring appointees to interfere in government proceedings involving the president, it would require political appointees to turn such matters over to career staff. The act also addresses the Trump administration’s open flouting of ethics laws already on the books, by granting more power to enforcement bodies like the Office of Government Ethics.
Such provisions have received scant public discussion, but with Republicans dead set against unrelated voting provisions, the legislation appears to have no chance of passing the Senate under current rules, which would require at least 10 Republicans to support it.
“Someone could pull out the ethics portion and see if they could get support,” said Richard L. Hasen, a law and political science professor at the University of California, Irvine, and an expert in election and campaign finance law. “But usually it takes a scandal to get people moving on ethics reform.”
And three months into the Biden era, the Trump presidency is already receding.
Democratic leaders have so far spurned behind-the-scenes suggestions by some lawmakers and watchdog groups to separate the voting and ethics titles, to give the ethics measure a better shot at passage.
“If we win ethics reforms but still allow politicians to pick and choose their voters or billionaires to buy elections, we will still see a government that prioritizes the needs of special interests over working families,” Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon and the bill’s lead sponsor in the Senate, said in a statement. “The reason the For the People Act was crafted as a singular package is because each of these interlocking parts works together to return power to the people.”
The act’s voting access measures would allow online, same-day and automatic voter registration, and require the use of paper ballots as a safeguard against fraud. It takes aim at partisan gerrymandering by standardizing rules and opening the process of congressional redistricting to the public. The act would broaden disclosure requirements for campaign and presidential inaugural committee contributions by nonprofit groups and publicly listed companies.
Its ethics provisions go beyond the executive branch. It would require the entire federal judiciary, including Supreme Court justices, to create a code of ethics within a year of the bill’s enactment. It would tighten reporting and other rules governing lobbying on behalf of foreign governments.
For Congress, the bill would impose fuller disclosure of lawmakers’ outside income, require congressional candidates to disclose whether individual campaign donors are lobbyists, prohibit House members from serving on the boards of for-profit companies, and bar House and Senate members and their staff aides from working to advance legislation that would benefit their or their families’ personal financial interests. It would also bar lawmakers from using taxpayer money to pay damages awarded in discrimination and sexual misconduct cases.
“It’s critically important that the For the People Act remain big, bold and together,” said Aaron Scherb, the director of legislative affairs for Common Cause, one of several groups working with Democrats on the bill, adding, “People don’t want piecemeal solutions to comprehensive problems.”
But insisting on it all, at this point, could mean getting nothing, and talk is percolating that the ethics measures should not be allowed to die with the broader bill. Danielle Brian, the executive director at the Project on Government Oversight, says the group has been working on salvaging some of the bill’s ethics proposals, some which might not need Congress at all.
“We are focusing on pushing those ethics reforms that are in the bill that the Biden administration could be implementing without legislation, right away,” she said.
For example, the group has been pressing for the creation of a centralized records database on the Office of Government Ethics public website that would open financial and other disclosures filed by executive branch nominees to greater scrutiny. Mr. Stier said the Partnership for Public Service had thrown its weight behind another Trump corrective, the Accountability for Acting Officials Act, which would prohibit acting agency chiefs from serving more than 120 days, and would require acting inspectors general to possess relevant qualifications.
Ms. Brian’s group has advocated several ethics proposals contained in a separate, expansive ethics bill, the Protecting Our Democracy Act, which is being updated in the House. It, too, would require candidates for president to release 10 years of tax returns, while beefing up protections for whistle-blowers and inspectors general, barring presidents from pardoning themselves and prohibiting presidents and vice presidents from receiving gifts, called emoluments in the Constitution, from foreign nations without congressional consent. The bill defines emoluments to include payments arising from commercial transactions, clarifying vague constitutional language that Mr. Trump and his family ignored as they profited from his presidency.
The bill would also strengthen enforcement of the Hatch Act, which prohibits executive branch employees from engaging in partisan political activity, in part by fining violators up to $50,000 per transgression.
But that bill’s timing remains uncertain, while its chief architect, Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the Intelligence Committee chairman, leads an investigation into the Jan. 6 riot at the Capitol.
Mr. Schiff’s whipsawing from one Trump-inspired affront to democracy to another underscores Congress’s dilemma. It cannot fix everything at once, even with bipartisan cooperation.
“Trump flooded the zone with so much norm-breaking and in some cases sheer illegality — the question is where to prioritize,” Mr. Hasen said. “You’ve kind of got to decide where your battles are going to be.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: DEMOCRACIES (90%); ETHICS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); PARTISANSHIP (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); 2021 US CAPITOL RIOTS (78%); CAUCUSES (78%); ELECTION LAW (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (78%); IMPEACHMENT (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (78%); MISCONDUCT (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); RIOTS (77%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); TAX LAW (76%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (73%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (73%); LABOR FORCE (63%); United States Politics and Government (%); Law and Legislation (%); Ethics and Official Misconduct (%); Conflicts of Interest (%); Constitution (US) (%); Storming of the US Capitol (Jan, 2021) (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Trump, Donald J (%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); JOE BIDEN (92%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); MITCH MCCONNELL (58%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Trump, Donald J
 Geographic: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: April 25, 2021

 

End of Document
Republican Support for Voting Rights Drops
The New York Times
April 25, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 26; ON POLITICS
Length: 1578 words
Byline: By Giovanni Russonello
Body




A Pew poll shows that the party's voters increasingly oppose measures that would expand access to the ballot.
The political divide in America has grown so deep and so entrenched that it now extends well beyond questions of policy. 
  People's feelings on how democracy ought to be carried out -- including whether voting should be made harder or easier -- may now be just as likely to be correlated to their political identity as they are to their views on actual political issues.
  That is the message coming from a Pew Research Center poll released on Thursday, which finds that Republicans increasingly oppose measures that would expand access to the ballot -- particularly those that former President Donald Trump frequently complained about during the 2020 campaign.
  The percentage of Republicans and independents leaning toward the G.O.P. who said that voters should be able to vote early or absentee without a reason plummeted, from 57 percent three years ago to 38 percent in the new poll.
  Until the most recent election cycle, when Mr. Trump drummed up opposition to absentee and early voting in an attempt to improve his electoral chances, those methods were largely seen as being at least as beneficial to Republican candidates as to Democrats.
  The caving-in of Republican support has driven a drop of eight percentage points in overall support for universal no-excuse early voting. Still, 63 percent of all Americans remain in favor of it.
  Republican support for the practice of automatically registering citizens to vote also dropped, to 38 percent, an 11-point dip since 2018. Among Democrats and Democratic leaners, 82 percent said they supported automatic voter registration.
  Establishing automatic voter registration and requiring states to hold early voting for at least two weeks are elements of H.R. 1, the For the People Act, a sweeping voting-rights bill that was passed last month by the Democratically controlled House. It would need at least 10 Republican votes to pass in the Senate, support that's unlikely to materialize. Some congressional Democrats are now urging the party's leaders to shift their focus toward a narrower bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, which had initially been proposed as a complement to H.R. 1.
  But the Pew poll found that other proposals included in the For the People Act -- like restoring voting rights to felons and making Election Day a national holiday -- did retain the support of a solid majority in both parties, possibly a reflection of the fact that right-wing news media outlets haven't targeted those proposals for attacks as frequently as they have others.
  Another particularly popular idea was to make early in-person voting standard (the poll question did not mention whether this kind of voting would be allowed without an excuse). Nearly four in five Americans supported making early voting available at least two weeks before Election Day, including 63 percent of Republicans and nine in 10 Democrats, the poll found.
  The survey was conducted among 5,109 adults nationwide via Pew's American Trends Panel, which uses a probability-based model to draw a sample that is representative of the national population.
  Liz Cheney vs. MAGA
  The regular conference meetings of the Republican lawmakers in the House of Representatives, held most weeks behind closed doors in the Capitol Visitor Center, tend to be predictable and thus irregularly attended affairs. The party leaders -- the House minority leader Kevin McCarthy, the minority whip Steve Scalise and the conference chairwoman Liz Cheney, whose job it is to run these meetings -- typically begin with a few housekeeping matters and then proceed with a discussion of the party's message or issue du jour. The conference's more voluble members line up at the microphone to opine for one to two minutes at a time; the rare newsworthy comment is often leaked and memorialized on Twitter seconds after it is uttered. An hour or so later, the members file out into the corridors of the Capitol and back to their offices, a few of them lingering to talk to reporters.
  The conference meeting on the afternoon of Feb. 3 was different in nearly every way. It lasted four hours and nearly all of the G.O.P.'s 210 House members attended. Its stated purpose was to decide whether to remove Cheney from her leadership position.
  Three weeks earlier, Cheney announced that she would vote to impeach President Donald Trump over his encouragement of his supporters' storming of the Capitol on Jan. 6 -- one of only 10 House Republicans, and the only member of the party's leadership, to do so. Because her colleagues had elected Cheney to the party's third-highest position in the House, her words were generally seen as expressing the will of the conference, and those words had been extremely clear: ''There has never been a greater betrayal by a president of the United States of his office and his oath to the Constitution,'' she said.
  The combination of her stature and her unequivocal stand amounted to a clear message from Cheney to House Republicans: If they sided with Trump in challenging the election, they were siding against the Constitution, and against at least one of their elected leaders. The tenor of the Feb. 3 meeting was therefore tense, portentous and deeply personal from beginning to end, according to several attendees who later described it to me.
  When it was Cheney's turn to speak, the 54-year-old congresswoman from Wyoming began by describing her lifelong reverence for the House, where her father, Dick Cheney, was minority whip more than 30 years ago before serving as George H.W. Bush's secretary of defense and George W. Bush's vice president. But, Cheney went on, she was ''deeply, deeply concerned about where our party is headed.'' Its core principles -- limited government, low taxes, a strong national defense -- were being overshadowed by darker forces. ''We cannot become the party of QAnon,'' she said. ''We cannot become the party of Holocaust denial. We cannot become the party of white supremacy. We all watched in horror what happened on Jan. 6.''
  Cheney, alone among House Republicans, had been mentioned by Trump in his speech that day. ''The Liz Cheneys of the world, we got to get rid of them,'' he told his supporters at the Ellipse shortly before they overran the Capitol. The president had been infuriated by Cheney's public insistence that Trump's court challenges to state election results were unpersuasive and that he needed to respect ''the sanctity of our electoral process.'' At the time of Trump's speech, Cheney was in the House cloakroom awaiting the ritual state-by-state tabulation of electoral votes. Her father called her to inform her of Trump's remark. Less than an hour later, a mob was banging against the doors of the House chamber.
  In the conference meeting, Cheney said that she stood by her vote to impeach Trump. Several members had asked her to apologize, but, she said, ''I cannot do that.''
  The line to the microphone was extraordinarily long. At least half of the speakers indicated that they would vote to remove Cheney. Ralph Norman of South Carolina expressed disappointment in her vote. ''But the other thing that bothers me, Liz,'' he went on, ''is your attitude. You've got a defiant attitude.'' John Rutherford of Florida, a former sheriff, accused the chairwoman of not being a ''team player.''
  Others argued that her announcement a day before the impeachment vote had given the Democrats a talking point to use against the rest of the Republican conference. (''Good for her for honoring her oath of office,'' Speaker Nancy Pelosi pointedly remarked when told of Cheney's intentions.) Likening the situation to a football game, Mike Kelly of Pennsylvania lamented, ''You look up into the stands and see your girlfriend on the opposition's side -- that's one hell of a tough thing to swallow.''
  ''She's not your girlfriend!'' a female colleague yelled out. Kelly's remark was immediately disseminated among Republican women in professional Washington, according to Barbara Comstock, who until 2019 served as a Republican congresswoman from Virginia. ''We emailed that around, just horrified, commenting in real time,'' she told me.
  Throughout it all, Cheney sat implacably -- ''as emotional as algebra,'' as one attendee later told me. She spoke only when asked a direct question. But when McCarthy concluded by suggesting that they put this matter behind them and adjourn, Cheney insisted that the conference vote on her status right then and there. The members cast their secret ballots, and Cheney prevailed, 145 to 61.
  The lopsided margin was almost identical to Cheney's own whip count going into the conference. Individual colleagues had confided in her that most of the conference was only too happy to move on from Trump -- but saying so in public was another matter. To do so would mean risking defeat at the hands of a Trump-adoring Republican primary electorate or even, many of them feared, the well-being of their families. In sum, it risked getting the Liz Cheney treatment.
  This is an excerpt from a feature in this Sunday's edition of The New York Times Magazine. Click here to read the full article.
  On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLLS & SURVEYS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); VOTER REGISTRATION (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); ELECTION LAW (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); VOTER DISQUALIFICATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (73%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (73%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (60%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (50%)
 Industry: CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (73%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOHN LEWIS (58%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: April 25, 2021

 

End of Document
Voting Rights Bill Puts Democrats on a Crash Course With the Filibuster; On Politics
The New York Times 
March 24, 2021 Wednesday 18:33 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 892 words
Byline: Giovanni Russonello
Highlight: A debate over Senate procedure seems likely to come to a head, with a divided Democratic Party pushing to expand voting rights and Republicans standing firmly in the way.
Body




A debate over Senate procedure seems likely to come to a head, with a divided Democratic Party pushing to expand voting rights and Republicans standing firmly in the way.
When they passed a $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief bill this month, Democrats in Congress sped past their Republican opposition, using the budgetary reconciliation process to present a case study of what happens when they don’t bend over backward for G.O.P. buy-in.
Today, as they began hearings on a major piece of voting rights legislation, Democrats were making a different calculation. The bill isn’t eligible for reconciliation and is almost certain to meet gridlock in the Senate, given the threat of a filibuster from Republicans.
Few issues, if any, divide the country along partisan lines more than voting rights. The bill being debated, the For the People Act, passed the House on party lines with no Republicans voting for it. Knowing that getting 10 Republicans to join Democrats in overriding a filibuster is virtually impossible, Senator Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, is putting Democrats on a collision course with the existential debate over the filibuster.
But at the hearing today, he relished the opportunity to drive home the divide between Democrats and Republicans on this issue. “Today, in the 21st century, there is a concerted, nationwide effort to limit the rights of citizens to vote and to truly have a voice in their own government,” Schumer said, later chanting, “Shame! Shame!” at Republican lawmakers.
There’s a poetic irony and also a perfect logic to the fact that a debate over the filibuster would come to a head over voting rights legislation. Not only because filibuster reform involves the Senate altering its own voting rules, but also because the most high-profile uses of the filibuster throughout history have often been in order to block civil rights.
Senator Raphael Warnock, a Georgia Democrat, in a recent speech on the Senate floor, succinctly tied the For the People Act to the filibuster debate. “It is a contradiction to say we must protect minority rights in the Senate while refusing to protect minority rights in society,” he said.
Pressure has been growing among Democratic insiders this week for changes to the filibuster. Senators have begun broadcasting their support for ending the practice, and a report in Axios published today quoted people close to President Biden saying he was ready to roll back the maneuver, although the White House has been publicly tight-lipped on the issue.
Just as Democratic senators were strident in their calls for federal voting rights laws today, Republicans were combative in their arguments against the bill. Some expressed outrage over the legislation’s proposal to end the mandatory 3-3 partisan split on the Federal Election Commission, a move that Democrats have said was necessary to promote reform.
“This bill is designed to corrupt the election process permanently, and it is a brazen and shameless power grab by Democrats,” Senator Ted Cruz of Texas said.
Senator Mitch McConnell, the minority leader, said that states simply “are not engaging in trying to suppress voters whatsoever.”
Senator Shelley Moore Capito, Republican of West Virginia, argued that the bill was trying to fix a voting system that didn’t need fixing, a position that seemed to go against prominent Republican narratives that the 2020 election was supposedly tainted by voter fraud.
But Democrats see an opportunity to press their case for filibuster reform with the For the People Act, a sweeping bill that would establish core national voting rights standards and create independent, nonpartisan commissions to handle the congressional redistricting process.
State-level Republican lawmakers have proposed hundreds of bills this year that would tamp down voting rights, according to the Brennan Center for Justice, and the G.O.P. will control the redistricting process next year in many key swing states. Democrats in Congress are looking at this bill as an increasingly urgent bulwark against voting restrictions and gerrymandering that could perpetuate targeted disenfranchisement, tilting the balance of political power for years to come.
Of course, it’s not yet certain that Senate Democrats will even unify in support of the bill. Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, who votes against his party with some regularity, is the lone Democrat who didn’t sponsor it, and he has yet to signal unequivocal support. If he does get behind it, he would have to work to roll back the filibuster as well (something that he and at least one other Democratic senator, Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, haven’t yet gotten behind) in order to make that support mean anything.
Still Processing: The N-word
On the season premiere of their podcast, the co-hosts and culture writers Jenna Wortham and Wesley Morris confront the most offensive word in the English language — a weapon of hate and a badge of belonging that’s everywhere and can’t be ignored. You can listen here, and tune in every Thursday for new episodes.
On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.
Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Antonio de Luca/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (95%); FILIBUSTER (94%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (78%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); HISTORY (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (72%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (57%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS ASSISTANCE & STIMULUS PLANS (57%); CASE STUDIES (56%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%); RAPHAEL WARNOCK (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: March 24, 2021

 

End of Document
The Fate of Biden’s Agenda Hangs in the Balance
The New York Times 
March 31, 2021 Wednesday 10:17 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 2716 words
Byline: Thomas B. Edsall
Highlight: And it isn’t all about the filibuster.
Body




And it isn’t all about the filibuster.
Every 10 years, after the collection of census data, states are required to redraw the boundaries of their congressional districts to ensure that they remain equal in population.
The process — as readers of this newspaper know — is vulnerable to gerrymandering, in which districts are redrawn to give favored parties, office holders or constituencies an advantage in elections.
At the moment, Democrats control the House by a slim 219-211 majority, with five seats vacant. The loss of just five seats in 2022 would flip control to the Republican Party, which would then be empowered to block President Biden’s agenda.
Both geographically and politically, the deck is stacked against Democrats, forcing the party and its leader to adjust election strategies every 10 years.
This time around, states with Republican governors and Republican legislative majorities contain more than twice as many congressional districts as states under full Democratic control.
Further compounding Democratic difficulties, Jowei Chen and Jonathan Rodden, political scientists at the University of Michigan and Stanford, write in the 2013 paper “Unintentional Gerrymandering”:
In many urbanized states, Democrats are highly clustered in dense central city areas, while Republicans are scattered more evenly through the suburban, exurban, and rural periphery.
As a result, according to Chen and Rodden, “when districting plans are completed, Democrats tend to be inefficiently packed in homogeneous districts.”
Despite winning the White House and the Senate, Democrats suffered a major setback in 2020 as their plans to wrest control of one or both branches of key state legislatures fell short. Democrats failed to take control of the statehouses in Pennsylvania, Michigan, Iowa and Texas, and of both branches in North Carolina — all states with large congressional delegations.
Still, there is hope.
First and foremost, Democrats have become competitive in many of the high-growth areas that benefit from redistricting; they have done so by pulling ahead of Republicans among voters with college degrees, who make up a disproportionate share of these prosperous communities.
In addition, a total of 18 states have switched from partisan to independent redistricting. And finally, Republican attempts at voter suppression have proven at times to backfire, prompting higher turnout among minorities and increased Democratic Party mobilization.
“One might be tempted to think that seat gains largely driven by economic prosperity favor Republicans while seat losses are found in impoverished and declining Democratic areas,” SoRelle Wyckoff Gaynor and James G. Gimpel, political scientists at the University of Maryland, write in their Feb. 21 article “Reapportioning the U.S. Congress: The shifting geography of political influence.”
In practice, Gaynor and Gimpel argue, Democrats have “adapted most impressively to compete and win in the newly emergent districts in Florida and the Far West,” narrowly eking out victories for control of Congress.
As states await census data to guide redistricting, there is one wild card in the mix: the possible enactment of voting rights reform, HR 1 or the For the People Act of 2021 — the measure that passed the House on March 3 on a 220-210 vote, but faces the threat of a filibuster in the Senate.
I asked Nicholas Stephanopoulos, a law professor at Harvard whose specialties include election law, about the bill. He emailed me to say that
The voting legislation currently before Congress would revolutionize the redistricting process if it passed. It would require all states to use truly independent commissions, effective immediately. Separate from this structural reform, the bill would also include quantitative partisan bias thresholds that maps wouldn’t be allowed to exceed. These thresholds would have real teeth.
At the same time, Stephanopoulos continued, the legislation would put the brakes on voter suppression laws:
The bill affirmatively requires a series of participation-enhancing policies for congressional elections: automatic voter registration, same-day voter registration, at least 15 days of early voting, expanded mail-in voting, restrictions on voter purges, restrictions on photo ID requirements, etc.
David Lublin, a political scientist at American University, similarly described the transformative potential of HR1 in an email:
The proposed legislation before Congress could have a huge effect in two ways. First, by putting in place a new trigger for the Voting Rights Act, Section 5 would become operative again and the Biden administration could use it to block discriminatory maps as well as an array of laws designed to suppress voting.
Second, Lublin continued, by preventing
members of either party from using district boundaries to entrench their advantage through redistricting. Even though Republicans would undoubtedly benefit from the geographic concentration of Democrats and racial redistricting, it would prevent egregious abuses.
In the case of Republican voter suppression laws, Nicholas Valentino and Fabian G. Neuner, political scientists at Michigan and Arizona State Universities, found in their February 2016 paper “Why the Sky Didn’t Fall: Mobilizing Anger in Reaction to Voter ID Laws” that
Surprisingly, empirical evidence for significant demobilization, either in the aggregate or among Democrats specifically, has thus far failed to materialize. We suspect strong emotional reactions to the public debate about these laws may mobilize Democrats, counterbalancing the disenfranchising effect.
In an email, Neuner cautioned that “our research is about short-term evocations of anger that may spur mobilization and it is not clear how long such anger can be sustained.”
Black voters have proven exceptionally determined in the face of electoral adversity, including Supreme Court rulings weakening the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and voter suppression legislation.
Kyle Raze, a graduate student in economics at the University of Oregon, studied turnout patterns in the wake of the 2013 Supreme Court ruling in Shelby County v. Holder. The court declared Section 5 of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, which required jurisdictions with a history of discrimination to get preclearance from the Justice Department for any change in election law, unconstitutional. Shelby opened the door to the enactment of voter suppression measures.
Raze, in his February 2021 paper, “Voting Rights and the Resilience of Black Turnout,” writes that
Despite well-founded fears to the contrary, the Shelby decision does not appear to have widened the turnout gap between Black and White voters in previously covered states.
Instead, Raze found
an accumulating body of evidence that suggests that voters mobilize in response to increases in the cost of voting when those increases are perceived as threats to the franchise.
While 2020 census data is not yet complete, it will determine the specific allocation of House seats to each state. Justin Levitt, a law professor at Loyola Marymount University, provided The Times with estimates of the number of House seats over which each party will exercise redistricting control. Levitt wrote in an email:
It looks like Democrats will control 73 congressional seats this cycle, Republicans will control 188, and 167 will be under split partisan control, plus 7 in states with one district.
These numbers represent a considerable improvement for Democrats compared with a decade ago, Levitt observes, when the party “controlled 44 seats, with Republicans controlling 213.”
The Gaynor-Gimpel article I discussed earlier describes the shape of old and new districts in past decennial redistricting. In the two most recent reapportionments, based on the 2000 and 2010 census results, clear patterns emerge.
Areas with high levels of manufacturing — a declining sector in recent decades — lost seats, as did districts with large percentages of Black voters. In 2000 and 2010, abolished districts were 37 percent Black, while newly created districts were 8 to 12 percent Black.
The median household income in abolished districts was well below the national median — 79 percent of the national median in 2000 and 77 percent in 2010 — while the new districts were decidedly above the national median, with income at 121 and 106 percent.
The abolished districts voted Democratic by strong margins, 67 and 70 percent in 2000 and 2010, while the newly created districts tilted Republican by slightly smaller but still substantial margins.
These developments handicapped Democrats in the past, but changing income and education patterns of partisanship — changes that intensified during the Trump years — will inevitably work to Democrats’ advantage.
In the past two presidential elections, Democratic gains among high income and well-educated voters — the kind of voters who benefited from redistricting in 2000 and 2010 — accelerated.
Thomas J. Wood, a political scientist at Ohio State, recently posted a chart on Twitter showing the income levels of white voters in each of the 19 presidential elections since 1948.
In the first 17 of these — through President Barack Obama’s re-election in 2012 — whites with incomes in the 96th to 100th percentile were consistently the strongest supporters of Republican presidential nominees among all white income groups. In 2016 and in 2020, with Trump as the nominee, that pattern abruptly shifted.
These super affluent whites not only shifted to vote Democratic, but they became the least Republican income group after decades of being the most Republican.
At the same time, Trump drove up Republican support among white working-class men — this is not news — many of them former Democrats living in declining communities that, according to Gaynor and Gimpel’s calculations, had lost political power as a result of redistricting.
In 2020, white men without college degrees voted 60-35 for Trump and similarly educated white women voted 54-40 for Trump, according to survey data from the Cooperative Election Study.
In other words, the political losers in redistricting have shifted toward the Republican Party and the winners toward the Democratic Party.
Robert M. Stein, a political scientist at Rice, emailed me his analysis of the consequences of these changes in Texas redistricting:
With a Republican governor and majorities in the Texas State House and Senate, Republicans are strongly positioned to control redistricting in 2020 and to add to the number of Republican U.S. House seats in Texas.
But, Stein added,
there are several obstacles facing Republican mapmakers that might constrain how many of the three new seats Republicans will gain in 2022.
The two most important of these are the fact that
The concentration of population growth has been in the triangle formed by Dallas in the north, Houston in the east and San Antonio in the southwest. These areas/counties are Democratic with their suburban areas increasingly trending Democratic.
and that “the loss of population has been greatest in west and northwest Republican counties.”
In sum, Stein wrote,
though the Republicans control all the levers to redistricting in 2020, they are constrained by a having to populate more U.S. House districts with a changing population and electorate that favors Democratic candidates.
Christopher Warshaw, a political scientist at George Washington University, pointed out in an email that the nationalization and polarization of elections, have
made it much easier for mapmakers to predict how people will vote in future elections. This, in turn, has made the partisan advantage gained during gerrymandering more durable in future elections than it used to be.
Despite the enhanced ability to draw partisan district lines, Warshaw wrote, other developments make him
cautiously hopeful that, overall, partisan gerrymandering will be slightly less extreme this cycle than in 2011.
These developments include the growing number of states that have nonpartisan redistricting commissions; the shift of some major states from one-party control in 2011 — Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Michigan — to divided government, forcing compromise; and the growing willingness of state courts to rule against extreme gerrymandering, including in North Carolina and Pennsylvania.
Warshaw is critical of the surge in Republican efforts to pass voter suppression legislation — “they are clearly anti-democratic” — but, he added:
They could actually backfire on Republicans by dampening turnout among lower-income, rural voters that increasingly support Republicans.
Put another way, Republican efforts to claim the mantle of “the party of the working class” may be at cross purposes with the drive to enact voter suppression laws that will fall heavily on the working class.
David Magleby, a political scientist at Brigham Young University, pointed out another twist in the redistricting process that will lessen the traditional Republican advantage.
While reapportionment will shift seats from blue states that voted for Biden to red states that voted for Trump, Magleby noted that “the story is a little more complicated.”
He cited the example of New York, a reliably Democratic state that may lose one or two seats, depending on the final census count. On the surface, that would seem to threaten Democrats, but in fact, Magleby notes that if the state loses one seat, it could be a Republican seat:
Within New York, population growth in Republican leaning areas has lagged behind Democratic leaning areas. Thus, a neutral districting process is likely to generate one fewer Republican seat in New York.
All of the above suggests that continued Democratic control of the House in 2022 and 2024 may hinge on passage of HR1 — the For the People Act— which in turn requires the Senate to either eliminate the legislative filibuster or agree on a rule change making voting rights measures exempt from the filibuster.
“If the filibuster remains,” Stephanopoulos, the Harvard law professor, wrote by email,
the next round of redistricting will be a dogfight. It won’t be as bad for Democrats as the 2010 round, because numerous states that had egregious Republican gerrymanders back then now have some sort of impediment to that happening again” (commissions, Democratic governors, interventionist courts).
“My best guess,” Stephanopoulos continued,
is that the congressional playing field will be a little more tilted in a Republican direction than it currently is, but significantly less skewed than in the early 2010s.
The problem for Biden, Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer is that they are pressing for enactment of a momentous agenda —$3 trillion for infrastructure, immigration reform — that faces overwhelming Republican opposition.
They have, in effect, no room for a House “a little more tilted in a Republican direction.” Even with the passage of the voting rights bill, the odds (based on historical midterm voting patterns) favor a Republican takeover of both branches of Congress.
“Since the end of World War II, elected presidents’ parties have suffered an average loss of three Senate and 22 House seats in midterms,” Charlie Cook, editor and publisher of The Cook Political Report, wrote on Feb. 16.
The enactment of Biden’s $1.9 trillion Covid stimulus bill has increased his popularity, but voters’ memories are short. At the same time that he retains high favorability ratings on his handling the economy and the pandemic, voters surveyed in a NPR/Marist March 22-25 Poll, registered unfavorable views of his handling of immigration (34 percent approve, 53 percent disapprove), and a March 20-23 Economist/YouGov survey found voters split on Biden’s handling of crime (39 approve, 40 disapprove).
Without approval of the kind of election reform the voting rights bill seeks, the odds will shift further against continued Democratic control of the House and Senate and possibly result in another Democratic president ground down by gridlock.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); REDISTRICTING (92%); ELECTIONS (91%); FILIBUSTER (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CENSUS (90%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US CONGRESS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); GOVERNORS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (78%); RIGHT TO VOTE (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); GEOGRAPHY (74%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); MINORITY GROUPS (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (72%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (72%); URBANIZATION (71%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Population (%); Midterm Elections (2022) (%); Elections, House of Representatives (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); Census (%)
 Organization: UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN (55%)
 Industry: COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (72%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); Biden, Joseph R Jr
 Geographic: MICHIGAN, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: April 1, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats Disagree Over Strategy to Push Through Voting Rights Bill
The New York Times
March 31, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 1720 words
Byline: By Nicholas Fandos and Michael Wines
Body




President Biden and leading congressional Democrats have made the far-reaching bill a top priority, but some proponents believe it needs major changes.
Democrats in Congress are quietly splintering over how to handle the expansive voting rights bill that they have made a centerpiece of their ambitious legislative agenda, potentially jeopardizing their chances of countering a Republican drive to restrict ballot access in states across the country. 
  President Biden and leading Democrats have pledged to make the elections overhaul a top priority, even contemplating a bid to upend bedrock Senate rules if necessary to push it through over Republican objections. But they are contending with an undercurrent of reservations in their ranks over how aggressively to try to revamp the nation's elections and whether, in their zeal to beat back new Republican ballot restrictions moving through the states, their proposed solution might backfire, sowing voting confusion and new political challenges.
  The hand-wringing demonstrates how urgent the voting issue has become for both parties since November, when President Donald J. Trump spread false claims of voter fraud that many Republicans believed. In the months since, Republican-led statehouses have advanced a wave of new laws clamping down on ballot access.
  Democrats have coalesced around the idea that pushing back on such measures is a modern-day civil rights battle that the party cannot afford to lose. ''Failure,'' Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, said last week, ''is not an option.''
  But while few Democrats are willing to publicly say so, the details of the more than 800-page bill -- which would radically reshape the way elections are run and make far-reaching changes to campaign finance laws and redistricting -- have become a point of simmering contention. Some proponents argue that Democrats should break off a narrower bill dealing strictly with protecting voting rights to prevent the legislation, known as the For the People Act, from collapsing amid divisions over other issues.
  ''Democrats have a narrow opportunity. There is a window here that could close anytime,'' said Richard L. Hasen, an election law expert at the University of California, Irvine. ''I worry the kind of fights necessary to keep even the Democratic coalition together could blow up the whole thing and lose the chance to get anything done.''
  A broad coalition of Democrats and liberal advocacy groups insist that the measure should not be broken apart, arguing that now is the time for an ambitious overhaul. But with Senator Joe Manchin III, a conservative West Virginia Democrat, opposed to the measure in its current form, Democratic leaders and Mr. Biden face tough decisions in the coming weeks about whether they can wrangle all their members behind it more or less as is, or must consider striking a narrower compromise.
  The margin for error is exceedingly thin: With Republican opposition unanimous, Democrats would not only need to hold all 50 of their senators together in favor of the bill but also persuade them to change the Senate rules to exempt it from the legislative filibuster, something Mr. Manchin and others have insisted they will not do under any circumstances.
  ''Right now, my focus is to keep this bill together as one package and get it through the committee,'' Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota and the chairwoman of the Rules Committee, said in an interview.
  Asked whether she might be willing to break the bill into pieces down the line, she declined to answer directly.
  As currently written, the bill constitutes a sweeping liberal wish list that includes restoring voting rights to felons who have served their sentences, making it easier to register and vote, reining in undisclosed campaign donations, securing elections against cyberattacks and ending the partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts. It was drafted as a statement of Democratic values during the last Congress, at a time when Republicans controlled Washington and there was no chance it would be enacted.
  Now, with Democrats in power -- albeit by slim margins on Capitol Hill -- they must transform a messaging bill into a viable piece of legislation.
  The most visible hurdle to date is the apparent opposition of Mr. Manchin, who said last week that he opposed allowing the federal government to wade into election law, which is typically left to the states. He signaled that he would be unwilling to vote for any elections bill that was not bipartisan, much less provide the 50th vote needed to change the Senate rules to get past an all-but-certain Republican filibuster.
  ''Pushing through legislation of this magnitude on a partisan basis may garner short-term benefits, but will inevitably only exacerbate the distrust that millions of Americans harbor against the U.S. government,'' Mr. Manchin said.
  Behind the scenes, two election lawyers close to the White House and congressional Democrats said Mr. Manchin was not the only one on their side with reservations about the measure. They insisted on anonymity to discuss the concerns because few Democrats want to concede that there are cracks in the coalition backing the measure or incur the wrath of the legion of liberal advocacy groups that have made its enactment their top priority.
  Black House members, for instance, are deeply uneasy over the bill's shift to independent redistricting commissions, which they fear could cost them seats if majority-minority districts are broken up, particularly in the South. Before the bill passed the House, its authors spent significant time reassuring members of the Congressional Black Caucus that there were adequate protections in place to preserve their districts. But a prominent committee chairman, Representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, remained so concerned that he voted against the bill, despite having sponsored it.
  Some fixtures of the party establishment believe the small-dollar public financing plan, which sets a six-to-one matching program for donations under $200, could incentivize and turbocharge primary challenges, particularly from the far left, by allowing them to cut into incumbents' usual fund-raising edge more quickly.
  Then there is a more vexing political concern, voiced most clearly by Mr. Manchin but shared by others, that after Mr. Trump spent months falsely claiming that Democrats were cheaters trying to rig the 2020 election against him, some independent voters -- fairly or not -- will view the legislation as an attempt to do just that and punish the party in the 2022 midterms.
  State elections administrators have raised their own complaints, too, quietly lobbying their senators to modify national voting requirements they say would be onerous or impossible to put in place by 2022. Some have complained they were simply not consulted on a major federal rewrite of the system they believe they have overseen effectively.
  ''I've been saying that no election administrators were harmed in the making of this bill,'' quipped Charles Stewart III, a leading expert on elections at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ''Running elections is detail-intensive, and it's not just shifting stuff around. You're adding new features and adding complexity, not just shifting complexity from one place to another.''
  Many say they support the goals of the proposal, but fear it overreaches in some places and issues contradictory orders in others. For instance, the legislation states that properly postmarked ballots that arrive as long as 10 days after an election must be counted as valid. But it also gives voters up to 10 days to correct mistakes on mailed-in ballots, meaning that late-arriving ballots with errors could delay certifying an election for up to 20 days. Some administrators believe that a 20-day lag threatens to cause havoc with schedules for formalizing election results.
  Others say the measure, which requires all federal elections to start with an identical set of rules, ignores the reality in the scores of thousands of jurisdictions that oversee the vote. One Democratic state elections director said the early-voting mandates in the bill would require a county of 2,000 residents to keep polls open for 15 days, 10 hours a day, even for an off-year congressional primary that draws only a handful of voters.
  Such an inflexible requirement, said the director, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of political repercussions, would create problems, not solve them.
  There are practical challenges as well. The legislation's security mandates for voting machines require that they meet the latest standards, issued so recently that machines that comply have yet to be manufactured. A grandfather clause would require the tiny federal Election Assistance Commission to certify and issue waivers for scores of thousands of machines, some dating to the 1990s.
  And a provision requiring states to shift redistricting to independent commissions is supposed to be put in place for political maps drawn this year, a deadline officials say would be all but impossible to meet.
  For now, many of the bill's proponents -- including dozens of groups focused on campaign finance, voting, gerrymandering and nearly every other liberal policy priority that would stand to benefit from Democratic control in Washington -- have locked arms to insist the package cannot, under any circumstances, be broken up.
  They say Democratic leaders are contemplating minor changes to placate elections administrators and have given them reason to believe that Mr. Manchin, a longtime proponent of campaign finance reform, will ultimately come around and support not only the bill but a narrow filibuster exemption to push it through on a simple majority vote once it becomes clear Republicans are unwilling to play ball.
  ''There is baseline commitment to keeping this bill together and passing it as it is,'' said Fred Wertheimer, one of the most respected government watchdogs in Washington. ''With 49 co-sponsors of this bill, it's not a situation where one should be negotiating against themselves to satisfy the desires of opponents. We strongly support adopting this bill as whole, enacting it as whole and getting it signed into law as whole.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); CONTESTED ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); ELECTION REFORM (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); FILIBUSTER (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (79%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); ELECTION LAW (78%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); BALLOTS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); CONSERVATISM (76%); REDISTRICTING (73%); ELECTION FRAUD (71%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (90%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); JOE MANCHIN (58%)
 Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%)
 Load-Date: March 31, 2021

 

End of Document
Joe Manchin and Stacey Abrams Can Meet on Common Ground
The New York Times 
March 11, 2021 Thursday 09:38 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1622 words
Byline: Ezra Klein
Highlight: True democracy is within our grasp.
Body




True democracy is within our grasp.
There were two columns I wanted to write this week. One was about Senator Joe Manchin’s comments cracking the door open on filibuster reform. The filibuster “should be painful and we’ve made it more comfortable over the years,” he said on “Fox News Sunday.” “Maybe it has to be more painful.” With those words — and, to be fair, a few more Delphic utterances, which I’ll get to shortly — Manchin reignited the possibility of filibuster reform and perhaps the restoration of the Senate.
The other was about the wave of new bills, proposals and laws across Republican-controlled states, restricting ballot access, making it harder to vote and undermining the fair administration of elections. In Georgia, SB241 would end no-excuse absentee voting, and HB531 would limit weekend voting. In Arizona, SB 1593 would shorten the early voting period and trash envelopes that weren’t postmarked at least five days before the election, and SB 1068 would give the highly partisan State Legislature more power over elections. The Brennan Center for Justice, which focuses on voting rights issues, calculated in mid-February that the number of bills introduced to restrict the right to vote in 2021 so far was seven times the size of the number that were introduced by the same time in 2020.
But then I realized something that made my job easier, even if it leaves the future of American democracy uncertain: These aren’t two different questions, but one intertwined question. There are ways to protect voting rights across the states — but they rely on filibuster reform in the Senate. Stacey Abrams, prophetic as always, made this point to me back in November, just a few days before the election:
The filibuster has been a useful tool, but it was only useful when people actually believed in and abided by the basic rules of the system. The Republican Party has shown itself incapable of following rules it does not like. And we cannot get to a nation where citizens get to participate in the selection of senators if we do not eliminate the filibuster to create the very baseline democracy that we require for this time.
The core power imbalance in America is that Democrats win more people, Republicans win more places. In 2020, Joe Biden won 551 counties and 81 million votes. Donald Trump won 2,588 counties and 74 million votes. The Democrats’ advantage among people was enough to win power nationally, but the Republicans’ advantage in counties gave them control of more states. When the dust settled, Republicans held 61 state legislative chambers, compared with 37 for Democrats. There are 23 states where Republicans hold the lower house, the Senate and the governorship — a governing trifecta that eases the passage of highly partisan bills — but only 15 states where Democrats do the same.
There is no doubt that Republicans perceive majoritarian democracy — “rank democracy,” as Senator Mike Lee of Utah has called it — as a threat to their interests. When House Democrats tried to pass same-day registration and vote-by-mail last year, Trump told “Fox &amp; Friends,” “They had things, levels of voting, that if you’d ever agreed to it, you’d never have a Republican elected in this country again.” The threat to Republican power comes from young voters and nonwhite voters, both of whom are growing as a proportion of the American electorate each year. That leaves Republicans with two options. They could try to choose more appealing candidates and fashion a more appealing agenda, to build a new coalition. Or they could use the power they have now to build legislative levees to protect themselves against the public’s will in the future. In state after state, they’ve chosen the latter path.
But the 2020 election gave Democrats a governing trifecta where it matters most: nationally. They hold the House, the Senate and the White House. And they have two bills — the For The People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act — that would bring America closer to true democracy than it has ever been before.
Let’s start with the For The People Act. The bill would implement nationwide automatic voter registration, same-day voter registration and online registration (did you know there are still states where you can’t register to vote online?). It would limit the use of voter purges — a common tactic in which states throw people off the rolls under the guise of reducing duplication and errors — and restore voting rights to Americans with a past criminal conviction. As far as federal elections go, it would secure at least two weeks of early voting in all states, expand vote-by-mail options and restrict secretaries of state from overseeing elections in which they are on the ballot (they’re looking at you, Brian Kemp).
It would also ban partisan redistricting and force states to use independent commissions to draw congressional lines (although this would not, sadly, take effect until after the 2030 census). It would force dark money groups to name their funders and amplify the power of small donors by matching their contributions 6 to 1. It is a vast bill, and I haven’t come close to exhausting its contents. (If you’d like to dig deeper, the Brennan Center has a terrific annotated guide.)
The John Lewis Voting Rights Act is more specific: It’s aimed at restoring the Voting Rights Act, after the Supreme Court gutted it in Shelby County v. Holder in 2013. To that end, it rewrites the V.R.A. to target states with current records of racial discrimination, not just past records; tightens the focus on electoral changes that have traditionally been used to disenfranchise minority voters, like voter ID laws; and empowers the attorney general to send federal observers wherever there’s a threat of racial discrimination in voting.
Both bills are necessary. Neither has any chance of winning 10 Republican votes in the Senate. Neither is a budget bill, and so — unlike the American Rescue Plan — neither can use budget reconciliation to pass with 51 votes.
So Democrats face a choice: democracy or the filibuster.
Which brings me to Manchin’s other comments about the filibuster. According to Politico, Manchin seemed to suggest requiring “the minority to come up with 41 votes to sustain” a filibuster. That’s interesting. The way the filibuster works now, you need 60 senators to break it, but only one senator to sustain it. That makes filibusters far more painful for the majority, which has to mass all its forces, than the minority. The congressional scholar Norm Ornstein has proposed flipping the burden, so that a filibuster requires 40 senators to sustain. Ornstein described the possible result in The Atlantic in September, imagining a situation very much like the one we’re in now:
If, for example, Democrats introduced a sweeping package of democracy reforms and Republicans filibustered them, the majority could keep the Senate in session around the clock for days or weeks and require nearly all the Republicans to be present constantly, sleeping near the Senate floor and ready on a moment’s notice to jump up and get to the floor to vote — including those who are quite advanced in years, such as Jim Inhofe, Richard Shelby, Charles Grassley, and Mitch McConnell. It would require a huge, sustained commitment on the part of Republicans, not the minor gesture now required. The drama, and the attention, would also give Democrats a chance to explain their reforms and perhaps get more public support — and eventually, they would get a law.
There are drawbacks to this, of course. One is that it gives the opposition party the power to simply stop all Senate business for as long as it wants. Yes, perhaps the majority could outlast them, and two months into the fight, recapture the floor and pass its bill. But that’s two months of Senate paralysis. And there is every reason to think Republicans would do as much filibustering as they could physically sustain.
For that reason, I would still prefer a reform that changed the 60 vote threshold directly, while ensuring that opposition voices got heard. I’ve always been partial to the proposal of former Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who would have ratcheted the votes required to end the filibuster down every few days: It would start at 60, then fall, after a few days of debate, to 57, and then, after a few more, to 54, and finally, after eight days of deliberation, to 51. I’d pair it with reforms to guarantee that senators of all parties could offer amendments on all bills and weaken the majority leader’s control of the floor schedule. Put together, that would give you a Senate with more space for deliberation, more guaranteed avenues of participation, more room for unusual coalitions to pass bills but, also, an end-of-the-day assurance that simple majorities could govern.
But while Democrats are debating the best way to make sure Republicans can be heard in the Senate, Republicans in the states are passing legislation meant to silence Democratic voters across the country. The attack on the Capitol failed on Jan. 6, but that doesn’t mean the quiet war the G.O.P. is waging on democracy won’t succeed. There are ways the filibuster can be reformed to ensure that the Senate minority has a voice. But it would be obscene to let the Republican Party use the language of minority rights to deprive actual minorities of the right to vote.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (96%); DEMOCRACIES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); PARTISANSHIP (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); ELECTION LAW (77%); MAIL-IN VOTING (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (77%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (72%); VOTER REGISTRATION (72%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); State Legislatures (%); Senate (%); Manchin, Joe III (%)
 Company:  FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (72%)
 Industry: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (72%); SIC4833 TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS (72%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (90%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (90%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); Manchin, Joe III
 Geographic: ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: March 11, 2021

 

End of Document
The Brewing Voting Rights Clash; On Politics
The New York Times 
March 2, 2021 Tuesday 13:58 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1220 words
Byline: Giovanni Russonello
Highlight: Republicans are reuniting — and re-energized — as they pursue a longstanding political goal.
Body




Republicans are reuniting — and re-energized — as they pursue a longstanding political goal.
The 2020 election was a wild one. And under the strange circumstances, Republicans wound up turning against one another on an issue that tends to unite them: voting access and elections.
Some Republican officials fought to restrict access to the ballot amid the pandemic, while others endorsed mail-in voting and other methods to make voting easier. After the election, some Republicans backed President Donald Trump’s unfounded claims of election fraud, while a number of state-level officials — such as Gov. Brian Kemp of Georgia and his secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger — defended the integrity of their own election systems.
But now that the election is behind us, Republicans are reuniting on this issue, leading efforts around the country to restrict access to the vote. And in many cases they’re weaponizing Trump’s fabrications from 2020 to justify doing it. In Georgia this week, the Republican-led state legislature is moving forward with a bill to restrict absentee voting and limit early voting on weekends.
The G.O.P. has one big advantage here: a newly cemented 6-to-3 conservative majority on the Supreme Court, which is broadly seen as receptive to restrictions on voting, even if it didn’t support Trump’s efforts to overturn the election. The justices heard oral arguments today in a challenge to the Voting Rights Act stemming from policies in Arizona during the 2020 election, and the court appeared sympathetic to the Republican plaintiffs’ arguments.
Democrats, meanwhile, are equally unified in their efforts to preserve widespread voting access, particularly in Black and brown communities that are most heavily targeted by restrictive voting laws. The House today held a debate on the For the People Act, known as H.R. 1, which among other things would create a basic bill of rights for voting access. The legislation is expected to pass the chamber tomorrow along party lines.
To put this all in perspective, I called Wendy Weiser, who studies these issues as the director of the Democracy Program at the Brennan Center for Justice at N.Y.U.’s law school. She took time out of a whirlwind news day on the voting front to answer a few questions for On Politics. The interview has been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.
Hi, Wendy. Let’s begin with the news from Georgia. What is the significance of the legislation making its way through the state legislature there, and is it part of a trend?
The bill in Georgia is one of the most significant and restrictive voter suppression bills in the country, but it is not unique right now. We’ve been tracking the legislation to restrict and also to expand voting access across the country for over a decade, and right now we have well over 250 bills pending in 43 states across the country that would restrict access to voting. That is seven times the number of restrictive voting bills we saw at the same time last year. So it is a dramatic spike in the push to restrict access to voting.
So we’ve seen this is a growing movement. It’s not brand-new this year, it wasn’t invented by Donald Trump, but it was certainly supercharged by his regressive attack on our voting systems. We’re seeing its impact in Georgia, but also across the country.
Republicans have been talking about voter fraud, and attempting to limit access to the ballot, for many years. How much is the current surge in restrictive voting legislation related to Donald Trump and the conspiracy theories he pushed last year, during and after the campaign?
Many of these bills are fueled by the same rhetoric and grievances that were driving the challenges to the 2020 election. In addition to expressly referencing the big lie about widespread voter fraud and that Trump actually won the election, they’re targeting the methods of voting that the Trump campaign was complaining about. So, for example, the single biggest subject of regressive voter legislation in this session — roughly half the bills — is mail voting.
That is new this year. We’ve been tracking efforts to restrict access to voting for a very long time, and absentee voting has not been the subject of legislative attack before. It was the politicization of that issue in the 2020 election, principally by the Trump campaign and allies, that I think helped elevate that issue to a grievance level that would cause it to be the subject of legislative attack.
The Supreme Court today heard oral arguments in a challenge to the Voting Rights Act, brought by the attorney general of Arizona. What is at stake in that case?
On a narrow level, the case is challenging two provisions of an Arizona law that made it harder for voters of color in Arizona to participate in the election process, but the case’s significance is much broader. The plaintiffs and the Republican National Committee are actually arguing to dramatically scale back the strength of the nationwide protections against voting discrimination in the federal Voting Rights Act.
About eight years ago, the Supreme Court gutted the most powerful provision of the Voting Rights Act, the preclearance provision, which applied to states with a history of discrimination. That led to disastrous outcomes across the country, but it did not invalidate the nationwide protections against discrimination in voting, Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. So this is the next shoe, which I hope will not drop.
At a time when voting rights in America are under significant attack, more than they have been in decades — an attack through racially targeted efforts to restrict access to voting — we need the protections of the Voting Rights Act more than ever. So this is absolutely the wrong direction to go in.
With the Voting Rights Act in peril, Democrats in Congress are moving forward with legislation to ensure people’s access to the ballot. What are their proposals?
There are two major pieces of voting rights legislation that are moving through Congress. The one that was not voted on today is called the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, and it would restore the preclearance provision of the Voting Rights Act, which requires a federal review of changes in certain states to see if they’re discriminatory. It would also make other improvements to the Voting Rights Act to make it more effective.
The other bill, which was voted on today, is called the For the People Act, H.R. 1. It would create a baseline level of voter access rules that every American could rely on for federal elections. This one would address almost comprehensively the attacks on voting rights that we’re seeing in state legislatures across the country. So, for example, in many states we’re seeing attempts to eliminate no-excuse absentee voting. H.R. 1 would require all states to offer no-excuse absentee voting. Every state would then offer that best practice of voting access, and it would no longer be manipulated, election by election, by state legislators to target voters they don’t like.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (93%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (92%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); CONTESTED ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTION FRAUD (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTION LAWSUITS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); MAIL-IN VOTING (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); CONSERVATISM (79%); DEMOCRACIES (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (79%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); TRENDS (77%); DISCRIMINATION (76%); RACE & ETHNICITY (76%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); GOSSIP & RUMORS (72%); LAWYERS (72%); PENDING LEGISLATION (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (66%); SUPREME COURTS (66%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Voter Fraud (Election Fraud) (%); Rumors and Misinformation (%); Republican Party (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Absentee Voting (%); Race and Ethnicity (%); Discrimination (%); United States Politics and Government (%)
 Industry: LAWYERS (72%)
 Person: BRIAN KEMP (79%)
 Geographic: ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: March 4, 2021

 

End of Document
Backers of D.C. Statehood Seek Merger in Voting Bill
The New York Times
March 27, 2021 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 964 words
Byline: By Carl Hulse
Body




In a change in tactics, advocates are pushing for statehood to be included in a broader bill taking shape.
WASHINGTON -- Hoping to capitalize on a Democratic push on voting rights, activists who support making the District of Columbia a state now say they want a stand-alone statehood measure added to a sweeping national election overhaul the Senate is beginning to consider. 
  Some backers of statehood say that they see the more comprehensive legislation as the most expedient route and that the current Democratic effort to protect minority voting rights would fall short if residents of the nation's capital ultimately lacked representation.
  ''We believe that including D.C. statehood in S-1 offers the most viable path to enfranchising the 700,000 mostly Black and brown citizens of D.C.,'' said Stasha M. Rhodes, a campaign director for the pro-statehood coalition 51 for 51, referring to the bill number of the Senate proposal. ''We think it is our responsibility to ensure that D.C. statehood is not left out of the conversation.''
  The call to include statehood in broad Democratic legislation that would institute fundamental changes in the nation's conduct of elections and campaigns is a strategic shift for the activists. They had coalesced behind an independent measure that would make the District of Columbia the 51st state and entitle residents who pay federal taxes to voting representation in the House and Senate. The change in tactics is not endorsed by Senate backers of the legislation, who still see a separate statehood bill as the best approach for both statehood and the voting rights measure.
  But the activists said they feared that the amount of political capital that would need to be expended to pass the so-called For the People measure over deep Republican resistance would leave little remaining to push the statehood bill. They want to make sure Congress acts while President Biden, a statehood supporter, is in the White House and Democrats hold majorities in the House and Senate.
  It creates a delicate situation for Senate Democrats, more than 40 of whom are sponsoring the statehood measure. They support making the District of Columbia a state -- creating a House seat and two Senate seats. But they see the voting rights bill as an extremely heavy lift and worry that trying to add statehood at this stage would be a significant complication for a measure they say is urgently needed before elections next year.
  The voting rights bill endorses the concept of statehood with language that declares ''there are no constitutional, historical, fiscal or economic reasons why the Americans who live in the District of Columbia should not be granted statehood,'' but it does not go beyond that.
  ''If passed, the For the People Act will take the crucial first step of creating a congressional record in support of statehood, but more must be done, and we need to pass separate legislation,'' said Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota and a statehood supporter, who, as chairwoman of the Rules Committee, is steering the voting rights measure in the Senate.
  Democrats say the measure, which has already passed the House as H.R. 1, has been years in the making. To pass it in a form sought by Democrats is probably going to require weakening the filibuster to overcome Republicans and Democrats who at the moment do not agree on that step among themselves.
  Statehood would provide another lightning rod for Republicans, who deride the idea as an unconstitutional power grab intended to entrench Democrats with the virtually certain election of two Democratic senators. Adding it to the voting rights bill would only intensify Republican opposition, if that is even possible.
  ''Why not throw Puerto Rico in, too, and pack the Supreme Court while you are at it?'' asked Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, who said Republicans had dug in against the bill. ''We are ready.''
  The statehood measure has gained momentum on its own in recent days with a hearing in the House, where it has previously passed, along with additional Democratic endorsements in the Senate, bringing to 42 the number of backers of the measure sponsored by Senator Thomas R. Carper, Democrat of Delaware.
  A spokesman for Mr. Carper said the senator remained ''open-minded on pathways'' but was trying to build bipartisan support for statehood on the basis of taxpayer fairness -- an effort that would be hindered by adding the statehood bill to the voting rights measure hotly opposed by Republicans.
  ''At the end of the day, this is an issue about basic fairness and representation for D.C. residents, and I look forward to making the case to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle on why they need to take up the cause of our fellow citizens in D.C.,'' Mr. Carper said in a statement.
  The activists said they expected resistance to their new drive but intended to keep the pressure on lawmakers to tie the statehood legislation to the emerging Democratic bill. A new digital ad campaign paid for by the group 51 for 51 began this week with a six-figure investment in Minnesota. ''For the People means for ALL the People, including 700,000+ Americans in D.C.,'' the ad says. ''Democracy reform must include D.C. statehood.''
  Though they prefer combining the two, the activists say they will certainly continue to back both the statehood measure and the voting rights bill should they not succeed. But from their perspective, this is a moment to push them together.
  ''Folks are having a conversation about structural democracy in a real way,'' said Maurice Mitchell, a leader of the Working Families Party. ''We just think this is a critical juncture and would be a missed opportunity if they weren't able to match that rhetoric with legislative action.''
             
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STATEHOOD (92%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); FILIBUSTER (78%); PUERTO RICO STATEHOOD (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); MINORITY GROUPS (77%); TAXES & TAXATION (71%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%)
 Geographic: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (96%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: March 27, 2021

 

End of Document
How Prisons Skew the Census
The New York Times
April 12, 2021 Monday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1204 words
Byline: By The Editorial Board
Body




Counting people where they're imprisoned takes political power away from cities and transfers it to rural areas.
Where do you live? For most people, that's an easy question to answer when the census comes around. It's much harder for those locked up in a state or federal prison, often hundreds or even thousands of miles from the place they last called home. 
  Longstanding Census Bureau policy is to count people as residing wherever they usually eat and sleep, known as the ''usual residence'' rule. For prisoners, that means being counted in the legislative districts where they are incarcerated.
  But that makes no sense, because virtually everyone who goes to prison comes from somewhere else, and almost all will return there after being released. While they are behind bars, they can't vote, nor do they have any attachment to the local community or its elected officials. They are counted, even though they can't hold their representatives accountable.
  The result is one of the more persistent and pernicious distortions in the redistricting process, known as ''prison gerrymandering.'' Now that the 2020 census count is over, and the nation begins its decennial struggle over how to draw new congressional and other legislative district lines -- and who gains or loses political power as a result -- it's a good time to talk about how we can get rid of prison gerrymandering at last.
  A healthy representative democracy needs an accurate picture of who lives where in order to allocate the proper number of lawmakers to represent their interests. It's why the census is the first job the Constitution gives Congress.
  Prison gerrymandering distorts this picture in two ways: by artificially inflating the population of places where prisons are, and artificially decreasing the population of the places where prisoners come from.
  Add to that the constitutional principle of one person, one vote, which requires all legislative districts to be roughly the same size. If large groups of people are counted in the wrong place, the result is a government skewed in favor of some and against others.
  When it comes to prisoners, the skew follows a clear pattern: Prisoners are disproportionately Black and brown people from urban areas, and prisons are disproportionately built in more rural areas. So counting people where they're imprisoned takes political power away from racial minorities in cities and transfers it to whites in rural areas.
  In one Rhode Island House district, for instance, prisoners account for nearly 16 percent of the population, even though only 4 percent of them are from that district.
  In Juneau County, Wis., it's even worse: Prisoners account for 80 percent of the entire population of one district.
  In Connecticut, a redistricting expert calculated that nine of the 151 state House districts are able to meet the required minimum population only thanks to prisons within their borders, and that eight of those nine districts encompass predominantly white communities. If the state stopped counting prisoners where they are locked up, the expert said, 22 districts would need to be redrawn.
  For most of American history the distortions caused by prison gerrymandering didn't make much difference. There weren't that many people behind bars. That changed with the incarceration boom that began in the 1980s. Today, more than two million people are held in state and federal prisons and local jails, with concrete consequences for politics and policy.
  In New York, the harsh Rockefeller drug laws, which mandated absurdly long sentences that fell on many young men and women of color, were consistently unpopular with the public. They survived largely because they were defended by legislators who came from districts that benefited from prison gerrymandering. At the height of the prison-building boom in New York, 28 of 29 new prisons were built in upstate and often rural districts, providing a reliable cash flow for those districts even as the inmates they housed were overwhelmingly from the big cities.
  Sometimes lawmakers are forthright about the benefits of exploiting prisoners for political gain. In 2015, Janet Adkins, a Republican Florida state representative, told party activists that the best way to oust a Democratic incumbent was to pack her district full of prisoners. Draw it ''in such a fashion so perhaps, a majority, or maybe not a majority, but a number of them will live in the prisons, thereby not being able to vote,'' Ms. Adkins said.
  The best solution to all this is for the Census Bureau, which provides the data for congressional and state districting, to change the ''usual residence'' rule: that is, stop counting prisoners where they are locked up and start counting them in the place they call home, or at least in the last place they lived before going to prison. That would be consistent with a line of Supreme Court cases holding that a person's residence isn't necessarily where she happens to be found at the moment the census occurs, but the place to which she has some ''allegiance or enduring tie.''
  In 2018, the bureau asked for public comment on the usual residence rule. Of the 77,887 comments it received about prisoners, 77,863 -- 99.97 percent -- said they should be counted at their home address. Despite the virtually unanimous consensus, the bureau didn't change the rule, although it agreed to provide states with access to data that make it easier for those that want to reduce the impact of prison gerrymanders.
  Many states have grown tired of waiting, and have begun outlawing prison gerrymandering on their own, by incorporating their own data on their prison populations into the census data. Ten states now ban the practice outright -- including California, New York and Virginia -- together representing 30 percent of the U.S. population. Bills are on the table in four more states, and roughly 200 local jurisdictions have stopped counting prisoners where they are locked up. This is progress, but it's piecemeal.
  Democrats in Congress are trying to force the issue by including it in H.R. 1, the omnibus democracy-reform bill also known as the For the People Act. The bill would require the Census Bureau to count prisoners at their last known address. But even if H.R. 1 becomes law -- which is far from assured at this point -- it can't fix the problem for the 2020 redistricting cycle, because the count is already done.
  Rather than wait another decade, states without a ban already in place can take action now. With the help of the newly detailed data from the Census Bureau, they can divide up their inmate populations among multiple districts, essentially diluting the impact of prison gerrymandering by ensuring that no one district gets to claim too many prisoners. It's not a perfect solution, but it may be the best way to fight this anti-democratic, racially biased practice until it can be eliminated for good.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Editorial
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: CENSUS (91%); CORRECTIONS (90%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); PRISONS (90%); REDISTRICTING (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (89%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT STATISTICS AGENCIES (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (73%)
 Organization: US CENSUS BUREAU (57%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%)
 Geographic: CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)
 Load-Date: April 12, 2021

 

End of Document
Inside a Voter Rights Law With Historic Implications
The New York Times
March 31, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 1377 words
Byline: By Michael Wines
Body




The expansive measure would set a nationwide floor on ballot access, nullify many voting restrictions, change the way political districts are drawn and rein in campaign donations.
The far-reaching voting rights measure that Democrats are pressing to enact, known as the For the People Act, was more a political statement than serious legislation when lawmakers first proposed it in 2019. 
  The bill, clocking in at 818 pages, includes a laundry list of Democratic priorities like expanded ballot access, tighter controls on political money and support for District of Columbia statehood. It had no chance of becoming law when Republicans controlled the Senate and the White House.
  But with Democrats in power, the wish list has become a potentially historic law and the most pervasive overhaul of federal election rules in recent memory. Republicans have assailed it as a Democratic effort to rig the political system in their favor, even as some privately acknowledge that the bill's broad aims are overwhelmingly popular, even among conservatives.
  President Biden and Democrats portray the bill as the civil rights imperative of modern times and call it essential to shoring up a shaky democracy. But many of them privately concede that some of its provisions, like restrictions on political money, have opponents in their own ranks.
  Here is a summary of some of the central elements of the measure:
  The bill would set a national floor for ballot access.
  Should it become law, the legislation would effectively set a national floor on ballot access, requiring all federal elections to start with an identical set of rules. States and other federal jurisdictions could tweak them to provide more access, but not less. Some states like Colorado and Minnesota have rules that are more generous that the bill mandates; others, like Texas and Tennessee, make it much harder to register and vote than the bill envisions.
  Jurisdictions could ignore the rules for state and local elections, but as a practical matter, the new requirements would most likely apply to all voting.
  Some Republicans charge that the bill would rig the voting rules in favor of Democrats. But Republican officials have been working for the past decade to restrict ballot access in ways that make it harder to vote for minority groups that traditionally favor Democrats.
  Beyond the civic benefits of greater participation in elections, it is clear that expanding voting to more people would benefit both parties. Indeed, as Republicans have increasingly appealed to lower-income and less-educated voters, some experts say the restrictions that they have imposed may actually be cutting into turnout by the party's loyalists.
  Many Republican states have had one or more of the voting provisions for years with no indication that they disproportionately favor one party.
  The measure makes it much easier to register to vote.
  All voters would be able to register, designate party affiliations, change addresses and de-register online; 40 states and the District of Columbia offer some or all of those options. Voters would also be automatically registered when visiting state or federal agencies unless they explicitly decline, similar to what has been required of most states -- but not always carried out -- by the federal ''motor-voter law'' that passed in 1993. Voters could also register when they cast a ballot, either on Election Day or during early voting, as is already the case in 21 states.
  Early voting would be expanded nationwide, with all jurisdictions offering it for 15 days, for 10 hours daily, at easily accessible polling places. All but a handful of states allow early voting; the average early-ballot period is 19 days, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. The bill would also require jurisdictions to provide at least one secure ballot drop box for every 20,000 voters.
  Mail voting would be extended nationwide, and states would have to prepay postage and electronically track ballots so voters know when their ballots arrive and whether they have mistakes that need to be fixed.
  It would defang many voting restrictions imposed by Republicans.
  Republicans have won enactment of voter-ID laws in most states by arguing that they are needed to combat fraud, even though the sort of in-person fraud that such rules would discourage is all but nonexistent. The bill would effectively nullify such laws, allowing voters to sign affidavits swearing to their identities rather than showing ID.
  The measure would also require that voters be notified at least a week before an election if their polling places have changed, and order steps to reduce long lines. Voting rights activists and specialists argue that turnout falls when polling locations are closed or changed.
  The legislation also tries to beat back rules adopted by some states, including Texas and New Hampshire, that make it more difficult for college students to vote. It would designate universities as voter-registration agencies and offer nonpartisan assistance to students who cast absentee ballots.
  Under the bill, states would be barred from taking voters off the rolls because they had not participated in recent elections, a practice that the Supreme Court upheld in 2018. Critics argue that the practice is aimed at reducing turnout.
  It would also restore voting rights to felons who have completed their sentences, cementing into law a practice that states have increasingly adopted but some, such as Florida, have resisted.
  Partisan gerrymandering would end.
  Among other redistricting changes, the bill would mandate that political maps be drawn by nonpartisan commissions, not by state legislatures. If a legislature refused to approve a map, a three-judge federal panel would take over drafting.
  A number of states have established such commissions in recent years, including Ohio and Colorado, but removing politics from political maps has proved difficult. Critics say Arizona's Republican governor has stacked the selection process for that state's commission, and the composition of Colorado's new commission also has come under fire. The legislation lays out detailed instructions for choosing panel members.
  Political contributions would be reined in.
  The legislation tries to stop the flow of money to campaigns from abroad by requiring political committees to report foreign contacts, outlawing the use of shell companies to launder foreign contributions and barring foreigners from advising PACs on contributions and other political efforts. These moves and other requirements are direct responses to Russian efforts to support Donald J. Trump in the 2016 presidential campaign.
  The most contentious provisions would pull back the veil over so-called dark political money, whose donors are secret, and regulate independent political expenditures -- mostly spending that is not expressly coordinated with a candidate -- by corporations.
  Those provisions would counter the Supreme Court's 2010 decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission that independent expenditures are a form of free speech protected by the Constitution. The ruling effectively allowed nonprofit groups to spend unlimited amounts of money -- $750 million in 2020, according to the advocacy group OpenSecrets -- to support or oppose candidates or causes while keeping donors anonymous.
  Public corporations would require approval by boards of directors and shareholders for independent expenditures and some other political spending over $50,000.
  The bill would also require nonprofit groups spending money on elections or judicial nominations to disclose the donor of any contribution over $10,000 and ban shifting money between groups to disguise a donor's identity. 
  It would also address the growing use of political advertising on the internet, requiring for the first time that ads disclose their sponsors and that online companies keep a public list of political advertising buyers.
  Finally, the measure would set up new funds to match small donations to Senate and presidential candidates. The money, raised through fines on corporate lawbreakers and tax cheats, would be available only to candidates who reject political donations of more than $1,000.
             
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (89%); VOTER REGISTRATION (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); POLITICS (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (73%); MINORITY GROUPS (73%); US CONGRESS (72%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STATEHOOD (70%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%)
 Geographic: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); COLORADO, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)
 Load-Date: March 31, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats Begin Push For Biggest Expansion Of Voting Since 1960s
The New York Times
March 25, 2021 Thursday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1866 words
Byline: By Nicholas Fandos
Body




Democrats characterized the far-reaching elections overhaul as the civil rights battle of modern times. Republicans called it a power grab that would put their party at a permanent disadvantage.
Democrats began pushing on Wednesday for the most substantial expansion of voting rights in a half-century, laying the groundwork in the Senate for what would be a fundamental change to the ways voters get to the polls and elections are run. 
  At a contentious hearing on Capitol Hill, Democratic leaders made a passionate case for a bill that would mandate automatic voter registration nationwide, expand early and mail-in voting, end gerrymandering that skews congressional districts for maximum partisan advantage and curb the influence of money in politics.
  The effort is taking shape as Republicans have introduced more than 250 bills to restrict voting in 43 states and have continued to spread false accusations of fraud and impropriety in the 2020 election. It comes just months after those claims, spread by President Donald J. Trump as he sought to cling to power, fueled a deadly riot at the Capitol on Jan. 6 that showed how deeply his party had come to believe in the myth of a stolen election.
  Republicans were unapologetic in their opposition to the measure, with some openly arguing that if Democrats succeeded in making it easier for Americans to vote and in enacting the other changes in the bill, it would most likely place their party permanently in the minority.
  ''Any American who thinks that the fight for a full and fair democracy is over is sadly and sorely mistaken,'' said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader. ''Today, in the 21st century, there is a concerted, nationwide effort to limit the rights of citizens to vote and to truly have a voice in their own government.''
  Mr. Schumer's rare appearance at a committee meeting underscored the stakes, not just for the election process but for his party's own political future. He called the proposed voting rollbacks in dozens of states -- including Georgia, Iowa and Arizona -- an ''existential threat to our democracy'' reminiscent of the Jim Crow segregationist laws of the past.
  He chanted ''Shame! Shame! Shame!'' at Republicans who were promoting them.
  It was the start of an uphill battle by Senate Democrats, who have characterized what they call the For the People Act as the civil rights imperative of modern times, to overcome divisions in their own ranks and steer around Republican opposition to shepherd it into law. Doing so may require them to change Senate rules to eliminate the filibuster, once used by segregationists to block civil rights measures in the 1960s.
  Republicans signaled they were ready to fight. Conceding that allowing more people to vote would probably hurt their candidates, they denounced the legislation, passed by the House this month, as a power grab by Democrats intent on federalizing elections to give themselves a permanent political advantage. They insisted that it was the right of states to set their own election laws, including those that make it harder to vote, and warned that Democrats' proposal could lead to rampant fraud, which experts say has never been found to be widespread.
  ''This is an attempt by one party to write the rules of our political system,'' said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, who has spent much of his career opposing such changes.
  ''Talk about 'shame,''' he added later.
  Some Republicans resorted to lies or distortions to condemn the measure, falsely claiming that Democrats were seeking to cheat by enfranchising undocumented immigrants or encouraging illegal voting. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas said the bill aimed to register millions of unauthorized immigrants, though that would remain unlawful under the measure.
  The clash laid bare just how sharply the two parties have diverged on the issue of voting rights, which attracted bipartisan support for years after the civil rights movement but more recently has become a bitter partisan battleground. At times, Republicans and Democrats appeared to be wrestling with irreconcilably different views of the problems plaguing the election system.
  Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri, the top Republican on the Senate Rules Committee, which convened the hearing, said states were taking appropriate steps to restore public confidence after 2020 by imposing laws that require voters to show identification before voting and limiting so-called ballot harvesting, where others collect voters' completed absentee ballots and submit them to election officials. He said that if Democrats were allowed to rush through changes on the national level, ''chaos will reign in the next election and voters will have less confidence than they currently do.''
  The suggestion piqued Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota and the committee chairwoman, who shot back that it was the current elections system -- an uneven patchwork of state laws and evolving voting rules -- that had caused ''chaos'' at polling places.
  ''Chaos is what we've seen in the last years -- five-hour or six-hour lines in states like Arizona to vote. Chaos is purging names of longtime voters from a voter list so they can't go vote in states like Georgia,'' she said. ''What this bill tries to do is to simply make it easier for people to vote and take the best practices that what we've seen across the country, and put it into law as we are allowed to do under the Constitution.''
  With Republicans unified against them, Democrats' best hope for enacting the legislation increasingly appears to be to try to leverage its voting protections -- to justify triggering the Senate's so-called nuclear option: the elimination of the filibuster rule requiring 60 votes, rather than a simple majority, to advance most bills.
  Even that may be a prohibitively heavy lift, though, at least in the bill's current form. Liberal activists who are spending tens of millions of dollars promoting it insist that the package must move as one bill. But Senator Joe Manchin III, a centrist West Virginia Democrat whose support they would need both to change the filibuster rules and to push through the elections bill, said on Wednesday that he would not support it in its current form.
  Speaking to reporters in the Capitol, Mr. Manchin said he feared that pushing through partisan changes would create more ''division'' that the country could not afford after the Jan. 6 attack, and instead suggested narrowing the bill.
  ''There's so much good in there, and so many things I think all of us should be able to be united around voting rights, but it should be limited to the voting rights,'' he said. ''We're going to have a piece of legislation that might divide us even further on a partisan basis. That shouldn't happen.''
  But it is unclear whether even major changes could win Republican support in the Senate. As written, the more than 800-page bill, which passed the House 220 to 210 mostly along party lines, is the most ambitious elections overhaul in generations, chock-full of provisions that experts say would drive up turnout, particularly among minorities who tend to vote Democratic. Many of them are anathema to Republicans.
  Its voting provisions alone would create minimum standards for states, neutering voter ID laws, restoring voting rights to former felons, and putting in place requirements like automatic voter registration and no-excuse mail-in balloting. Many of the restrictive laws proposed by Republicans in the states would move in the opposite direction.
  The bill would also require states to use independent commissions to draw nonpartisan congressional districts, a change that would weaken the advantages of Republicans who control the majority of state legislatures currently in charge of drawing those maps. It would force super PACs to disclose their big donors and create a new public campaign financing system for congressional candidates.
  Democrats also said they still planned to advance a separate bill restoring a key enforcement provision in the Voting Rights Act of 1965, after a 2013 Supreme Court ruling gutted it. The ruling paved the way for many of the restrictive state laws Democrats are now fighting.
  In the hearing room on Wednesday, Republicans ticked through a long list of provisions they did not like, including a restructuring of the Federal Election Commission to make it more partisan and punitive, a host of election administration changes they predicted would cause mass ''chaos'' if carried out and the public campaign financing system.
  ''This bill is the single most dangerous bill this committee has ever considered,'' Mr. Cruz said. ''This bill is designed to corrupt the election process permanently, and it is a brazen and shameless power grab by Democrats.''
  Mr. Cruz falsely claimed that the bill would register undocumented immigrants to vote and accused Democrats of wanting the most violent criminals to cast ballots, too.
  In fact, it is illegal for noncitizens to vote, and the bill would do nothing to change that or a requirement that people registering to vote swear they are citizens. It would extend the franchise to millions of former felons, as some states already do, but only after they have served their sentences.
  Though few senators mentioned him by name, Mr. Trump and his false claims of election fraud hung heavily over the debate.
  To make their case, Republicans turned to two officials who backed an effort to overturn then-President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr.'s election victory. Mac Warner, the secretary of state of West Virginia, and Todd Rokita, the attorney general of Indiana, both supported a Texas lawsuit late last year asking the Supreme Court to invalidate the election results in key battleground states Mr. Biden won, citing groundless accusations of voting improprieties being spread by Mr. Trump.
  On Wednesday, Democrats balked when Mr. Rokita, a former Republican congressman, asserted that their proposed changes would ''open our elections up to increased voter fraud and irregularities'' like the ones that he said had caused widespread voter mistrust in the 2020 outcome.
  Senator Jon Ossoff, a freshman Democrat from Georgia, chastised the attorney general, saying he was spreading misinformation and conspiracies.
  ''I take exception to the comments that you just made, Mr. Rokita, that public concern regarding the integrity of the recent election is born of anything but a deliberate and sustained misinformation campaign led by a vain former president unwilling to accept his own defeat,'' Mr. Ossoff said.
  Mr. Rokita merely scoffed and repeated an earlier threat to sue to block the legislation from being carried out should it ever become law, a remedy that many Republican-led states would most likely pursue if Democrats were able to win its enactment.
  ''You are entitled to your opinion, as misinformed as it may be, but I share the opinion of Americans,'' Mr. Rokita said.
  Sixty-five percent of voters believe the election was free and fair, according to a Morning Consult poll conducted in late January, but only 32 percent of Republicans believe that.
             
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); DEMOCRACIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POLITICS (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (79%); FILIBUSTER (79%); US CONGRESS (79%); LEGISLATION (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (74%); MAIL-IN VOTING (73%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (70%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (59%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: March 25, 2021

 

End of Document
Here’s How Democrats’ Sweeping Voting Rights Law Would Work
The New York Times 
March 30, 2021 Tuesday 09:58 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1396 words
Byline: Michael Wines
Highlight: The expansive measure would set a nationwide floor on ballot access, nullify many voting restrictions, change the way political districts are drawn and rein in campaign donations.
Body




The expansive measure would set a nationwide floor on ballot access, nullify many voting restrictions, change the way political districts are drawn and rein in campaign donations.
The far-reaching voting rights measure that Democrats are pressing to enact, known as the For the People Act, was more a political statement than serious legislation when lawmakers first proposed it in 2019.
The bill, clocking in at 818 pages, includes a laundry list of Democratic priorities like expanded ballot access, tighter controls on political money and support for District of Columbia statehood. It had no chance of becoming law when Republicans controlled the Senate and the White House.
But with Democrats in power, the wish list has become a potentially historic law and the most pervasive overhaul of federal election rules in recent memory. Republicans have assailed it as a Democratic effort to rig the political system in their favor, even as some privately acknowledge that the bill’s broad aims are overwhelmingly popular, even among conservatives.
President Biden and Democrats portray the bill as the civil rights imperative of modern times and call it essential to shoring up a shaky democracy. But many of them privately concede that some of its provisions, like restrictions on political money, have opponents in their own ranks.
Here is a summary of some of the central elements of the measure:
The bill would set a national floor for ballot access.
Should it become law, the legislation would effectively set a national floor on ballot access, requiring all federal elections to start with an identical set of rules. States and other federal jurisdictions could tweak them to provide more access, but not less. Some states like Colorado and Minnesota have rules that are more generous that the bill mandates; others, like Texas and Tennessee, make it much harder to register and vote than the bill envisions.
Jurisdictions could ignore the rules for state and local elections, but as a practical matter, the new requirements would most likely apply to all voting.
Some Republicans charge that the bill would rig the voting rules in favor of Democrats. But Republican officials have been working for the past decade to restrict ballot access in ways that make it harder to vote for minority groups that traditionally favor Democrats.
Beyond the civic benefits of greater participation in elections, it is clear that expanding voting to more people would benefit both parties. Indeed, as Republicans have increasingly appealed to lower-income and less-educated voters, some experts say the restrictions that they have imposed may actually be cutting into turnout by the party’s loyalists.
Many Republican states have had one or more of the voting provisions for years with no indication that they disproportionately favor one party.
The measure makes it much easier to register to vote.
All voters would be able to register, designate party affiliations, change addresses and de-register online; 40 states and the District of Columbia offer some or all of those options. Voters would also be automatically registered when visiting state or federal agencies unless they explicitly decline, similar to what has been required of most states — but not always carried out — by the federal “motor-voter law” that passed in 1993. Voters could also register when they cast a ballot, either on Election Day or during early voting, as is already the case in 21 states.
Early voting would be expanded nationwide, with all jurisdictions offering it for 15 days, for 10 hours daily, at easily accessible polling places. All but a handful of states allow early voting; the average early-ballot period is 19 days, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. The bill would also require jurisdictions to provide at least one secure ballot drop box for every 20,000 voters.
Mail voting would be extended nationwide, and states would have to prepay postage and electronically track ballots so voters know when their ballots arrive and whether they have mistakes that need to be fixed.
It would defang many voting restrictions imposed by Republicans.
Republicans have won enactment of voter-ID laws in most states by arguing that they are needed to combat fraud, even though the sort of in-person fraud that such rules would discourage is all but nonexistent. The bill would effectively nullify such laws, allowing voters to sign affidavits swearing to their identities rather than showing ID.
The measure would also require that voters be notified at least a week before an election if their polling places have changed, and order steps to reduce long lines. Voting rights activists and specialists argue that turnout falls when polling locations are closed or changed.
The legislation also tries to beat back rules adopted by some states, including Texas and New Hampshire, that make it more difficult for college students to vote. It would designate universities as voter-registration agencies and offer nonpartisan assistance to students who cast absentee ballots.
Under the bill, states would be barred from taking voters off the rolls because they had not participated in recent elections, a practice that the Supreme Court upheld in 2018. Critics argue that the practice is aimed at reducing turnout.
It would also restore voting rights to felons who have completed their sentences, cementing into law a practice that states have increasingly adopted but some, such as Florida, have resisted.
Partisan gerrymandering would end.
Among other redistricting changes, the bill would mandate that political maps be drawn by nonpartisan commissions, not by state legislatures. If a legislature refused to approve a map, a three-judge federal panel would take over drafting.
A number of states have established such commissions in recent years, including Ohio and Colorado, but removing politics from political maps has proved difficult. Critics say Arizona’s Republican governor has stacked the selection process for that state’s commission, and the composition of Colorado’s new commission also has come under fire. The legislation lays out detailed instructions for choosing panel members.
Political contributions would be reined in.
The legislation tries to stop the flow of money to campaigns from abroad by requiring political committees to report foreign contacts, outlawing the use of shell companies to launder foreign contributions and barring foreigners from advising PACs on contributions and other political efforts. These moves and other requirements are direct responses to Russian efforts to support Donald J. Trump in the 2016 presidential campaign.
The most contentious provisions would pull back the veil over so-called dark political money, whose donors are secret, and regulate independent political expenditures — mostly spending that is not expressly coordinated with a candidate — by corporations.
Those provisions would counter the Supreme Court’s 2010 decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission that independent expenditures are a form of free speech protected by the Constitution. The ruling effectively allowed nonprofit groups to spend unlimited amounts of money — $750 million in 2020, according to the advocacy group OpenSecrets — to support or oppose candidates or causes while keeping donors anonymous.
Public corporations would require approval by boards of directors and shareholders for independent expenditures and some other political spending over $50,000.
The bill would also require nonprofit groups spending money on elections or judicial nominations to disclose the donor of any contribution over $10,000 and ban shifting money between groups to disguise a donor’s identity. 
It would also address the growing use of political advertising on the internet, requiring for the first time that ads disclose their sponsors and that online companies keep a public list of political advertising buyers.
Finally, the measure would set up new funds to match small donations to Senate and presidential candidates. The money, raised through fines on corporate lawbreakers and tax cheats, would be available only to candidates who reject political donations of more than $1,000.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (92%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTION FRAUD (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); VOTER REGISTRATION (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL ADVERTISING (78%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (78%); REDISTRICTING (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); MINORITY GROUPS (73%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STATEHOOD (70%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Absentee Voting (%); Voter Fraud (Election Fraud) (%); Presidential Elections (US) (%); Elections, Courts and the Judiciary (%); Campaign Finance (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); States (US) (%); Political Advertising (%); Law and Legislation (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); United States Politics and Government (%)
 Industry: POLITICAL ADVERTISING (78%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%)
 Geographic: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); COLORADO, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: July 19, 2021

 

End of Document
For Voting Rights Advocates, a ‘Once in a Generation Moment’ Looms
The New York Times 
March 15, 2021 Monday 07:00 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 2000 words
Byline: Nicholas Fandos and Michael Wines
Highlight: Opposition to restrictive Republican voting laws — and support for a sweeping Democratic bill — fuels a movement like none in decades. But can it succeed?
Body




Opposition to restrictive Republican voting laws — and support for a sweeping Democratic bill — fuels a movement like none in decades. But can it succeed?
WASHINGTON — State and national voting-rights advocates are waging the most consequential political struggle over access to the ballot since the civil rights era, a fight increasingly focused on a far-reaching federal overhaul of election rules in a last-ditch bid to offset a wave of voting restrictions sweeping Republican-controlled state legislatures.
The federal voting bill, which passed in the House this month with only Democratic support, includes a landmark national expansion of voting rights, an end to partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts and new transparency requirements on the flood of dark money financing elections that would override the rash of new state laws.
The energy in support for it radiates from well-financed veteran organizers to unpaid volunteers, many who were called to political activism after former President Donald J. Trump’s upset win in 2016. It is engaging Democrats in Washington and voting rights activists in crucial states from Georgia to Iowa to West Virginia to Arizona — some facing rollbacks in access to the ballot, some with senators who will play pivotal roles and some with both.
But after approval of the Democratic bill in the House, the campaign to pass the For the People Act, designated Senate Bill 1, increasingly appears to be on a collision course with the filibuster. The rule requires 60 votes for passage of most legislation in a bitterly divided Senate, meaning that Republicans can kill the voting bill and scores of other liberal priorities despite unified Democratic control of Washington.
To succeed, Democrats will have to convince a handful of moderate holdouts to change the rules, at least for this legislation, with the likelihood that a single defection in their own party would doom their efforts. It is a daunting path with no margin for error, but activists believe the costs for failure, given the Republican limits on voting, would be so high that some accommodation on the filibuster could become inevitable.
Two left-leaning elections groups, the advocacy arm of End Citizens United and Let America Vote along with the National Democratic Redistricting Committee, plan this week to announce an infusion of $30 million to try to hasten the groundswell. The money will fund paid advertising in at least a dozen states and finance organizers to target Democratic and Republican swing senators in six of them.
“We are at a once-in-a-generation moment,” said Tiffany Muller, president of End Citizens United and Let America Vote. “We either are going to see one of the most massive rollbacks of our democracy in generations, or we have an opportunity to say: ‘No, that is not what America stands for. We are going to strengthen democracy and make sure everyone has an equal voice.’”
The sense of a pivotal moment is the one thing Democrats and Republicans agree on. Republicans are still inflamed by Mr. Trump’s false claims of a stolen election and the party’s unified message that voting restrictions, many of which fall most heavily on minorities and Democratic-leaning voters, are needed to prevent fraud, which studies have repeatedly shown to barely exist.
“This bill is the opposite of good governance — it’s a cynical attempt by the left to put their thumb on the scales of democracy and engineer our laws to help them win elections,” said Dan Conston, president of the Republican-aligned American Action Network. “They want to limit free speech, funnel public funds into their campaign accounts, seize from states the ability to run their own free and fair elections, and then spin it like this is really all about protecting voting rights.”
Ms. Muller and others are ostensibly focused on winning support for election legislation from 10 moderate Republican senators, including Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Susan M. Collins of Maine.
But with Republican leaders promising near-unanimous opposition in the Senate, Democrats and their allies are  positioning voting rights as the most persuasive case for scrapping or changing the filibuster that would limit much of Democrats’ legislative agenda.
“It is too important an issue and we are facing too big a crisis to let an arcane procedural motion hold back the passage of this bill,” Ms. Muller said. She argued that the rollback of voting rights was an existential threat to the democracy on which all other liberal causes, from gun control to health care reform, depend.
The urgency for federal action has mounted not just among Washington lobbyists and Democratic lawmakers, but grass roots groups that normally fight battles in state legislatures and city councils. Many spent the winter opposing the Republican voting agenda that included curbs on mail-in and early voting and stiffer voter ID requirements.
Lawmakers in Republican-controlled states have largely rebuffed those groups, leaving Democrats to see federal action as the only possible brake on widespread voting restrictions. At the same time, a handful of crucial Republican-led states are preparing to draw new state and congressional district maps in the fall that could further tilt power in their direction and lock Democrats out of a House majority for years.
Voting-rights proponents say they have not given up on stopping restrictive laws in states. The Arizona group Civic Engagement Beyond Voting, has already registered 2,000 people this year to testify remotely on proposed state legislation, with voting rights as a priority.
“People are up in arms,” said Cathy Kouts Sigmon, the group’s founder. “They’re relating these bills to how they vote and how members of their family vote.”
Voting-rights advocates in Georgia, who claim to have slowed or killed some restrictive bills, are aiming at local companies that have supported the bills’ sponsors, including Home Depot, Coca-Cola, Delta Air Lines and UPS. An advertising campaign led by voting and civil rights groups  demands that the firms use their lobbying muscle in the Georgia statehouse to stop repressive voting bills instead of contributing to their Republican authors.
“They spent most of Black History Month peppering us with Martin Luther King quotes, but now that Blacks’ future is in jeopardy, they’re silent,” Nsé Ufot, the chief executive of one participant, the New Georgia Project, said last week. “We’re using digital ads, billboards, direct action at warehouses and call centers — we’re serious. This is urgent.”
One possible sign of some success: On Sunday, the Georgia Chamber of Commerce, whose members include those companies, expressed “concern and opposition” to restrictive clauses in two Republican bills.
Increasingly, though, the focus is on federal legislation. Ms. Sigmon’s group is recruiting Arizonans to lobby their senators on the elections bill. So are local chapters of Indivisible,  a movement founded in response to Mr. Trump’s election, in Georgia and Arizona.
And so have national advocacy groups. Common Cause runs weeknight phone banks recruiting backers for the bill, and says it has generated 700,000 text messages supporting it. “It’s been a pretty incredible outpouring of support, because we all know what this moment means,” said Izzy Bronstein, the group’s national campaigns manager. 
In Phoenix, the advocacy group Progress Arizona coordinates a statewide campaign to persuade Senator Kyrsten Sinema, a first-term Democrat, to drop her support of the filibuster. Among its tactics: billboards projected at night onto buildings and other spots, calling for an end to the filibuster and displaying the senator’s Capitol Hill phone number.
In Charleston, W. Va., Takeiya Smith of the advocacy group For West Virginia’s Future works with some 70 students at six state colleges to generate calls on Senate Bill 1 to Senators Shelley Capito, a Republican, and particularly Joe Manchin III, a Democrat whose support for the filibuster is a liberal target. The group plans daily campus events this week highlighting different parts of the measure. It is in turn allied with a national coalition, the Declaration for American Democracy, that has enrolled 190 organizations to push for its passage.
In Atlanta, theBlack Voters Matter Fund is preparing with other groups a national campaign for Senate Bill 1 aimed  at both senators and President Biden, who has expressed hope for the bill’s passage but has not actively worked for it.
“He’s got to have his Lyndon B. Johnson moment,” said Cliff Albright, the group’s executive director, referring to the former president’s arm-twisting on Capitol Hill for the Voting Rights Act in 1965.
 “You’re president of the United States. You need to do more than hope that it passes,” he said of Mr. Biden. “He needs to use everything he’s learned over 47 years in Washington, D.C., to get this bill passed.”
Democrats first introduced the elections bill in 2019 as a catchall measure to address growing public disillusionment with dark money and corporate interests in politics. But as Republican state officials have raced to target voter participation, the bill’s voting provisions have increasingly been viewed by many on the left as essential protections to American democracy — and to the ability of Democratic voters to cast ballots.
If it became law, the bill would drastically expand early and mail-in voting, neuter restrictive state voter ID laws, make it harder to purge voter rolls while automatically registering all eligible voters and restoring voting rights to former felons. Those and other changes would most likely increase voter participation, especially by minority voters who disproportionately lean Democratic.
Senators plan to reintroduce the bill this week and Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota and the chairwoman of the Senate committee that will advance it, has promised a hearing on March 24.
But what happens next is a matter of hot political and strategic debate centered on Democrats’ fight over the filibuster, where a handful of moderates so far appear unwilling to change or drop the tactic. All 50 Democrats probably would have to agree to alter the rules.
In an interview, Ms. Klobuchar suggested that if senators could not agree to scrap the filibuster altogether, they could try to find a compromise, potentially allowing measures on voting and elections like Senate Bill 1 to pass with a simple majority, but not other bills.
“It is so fundamental to everything else, it has to get done,” she said.
Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader, has been less definitive but indicated last week that he, too, may view voting rights as a unique case. “If we can get some bipartisan support, great, but if not, our caucus will meet and we will figure out how to get it done,” he said in a radio interview. “Failure is not an option.”
End Citizens United, Let America Vote and the National Democratic Redistricting Committee plan to run television and digital ads in Alaska, Arizona, Georgia, Maine and Pennsylvania, homes to several key swing senators. A later phase will target up to 15 red and blue states. The groups will also dispatch 50 paid staff members to states, including Mr. Manchin’s West Virginia.
“We almost don’t have a choice,” said Kelly Ward Burton, president of the Democratic redistricting group. “Because of what’s happening in the states, it’s not theoretical. It’s happening right before our eyes. It would be irresponsible not to do anything about this.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (93%); ELECTION LAW (92%); RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); FILIBUSTER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); REDISTRICTING (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); DEMOCRACIES (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); APPROVALS (70%); VOLUNTEERS (53%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); Democratic Party (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Georgia (%); Arizona (%); West Virginia (%); Law and Legislation (%); Black People (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); JOE MANCHIN (73%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Manchin, Joe III
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: April 14, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats Begin Push for Biggest Expansion of Voting Since 1960s
The New York Times 
March 24, 2021 Wednesday 20:39 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1867 words
Byline: Nicholas Fandos
Highlight: Democrats characterized the far-reaching elections overhaul as the civil rights battle of modern times. Republicans called it a power grab that would put their party at a permanent disadvantage.
Body




Democrats characterized the far-reaching elections overhaul as the civil rights battle of modern times. Republicans called it a power grab that would put their party at a permanent disadvantage.
Democrats began pushing on Wednesday for the most substantial expansion of voting rights in a half-century, laying the groundwork in the Senate for what would be a fundamental change to the ways voters get to the polls and elections are run.
At a contentious hearing on Capitol Hill, Democratic leaders made a passionate case for a bill that would mandate automatic voter registration nationwide, expand early and mail-in voting, end gerrymandering that skews congressional districts for maximum partisan advantage and curb the influence of money in politics.
The effort is taking shape as Republicans have introduced more than 250 bills to restrict voting in 43 states and have continued to spread false accusations of fraud and impropriety in the 2020 election. It comes just months after those claims, spread by President Donald J. Trump as he sought to cling to power, fueled a deadly riot at the Capitol on Jan. 6 that showed how deeply his party had come to believe in the myth of a stolen election.
Republicans were unapologetic in their opposition to the measure, with some openly arguing that if Democrats succeeded in making it easier for Americans to vote and in enacting the other changes in the bill, it would most likely place their party permanently in the minority.
“Any American who thinks that the fight for a full and fair democracy is over is sadly and sorely mistaken,” said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader. “Today, in the 21st century, there is a concerted, nationwide effort to limit the rights of citizens to vote and to truly have a voice in their own government.”
Mr. Schumer’s rare appearance at a committee meeting underscored the stakes, not just for the election process but for his party’s own political future. He called the proposed voting rollbacks in dozens of states — including Georgia, Iowa and Arizona — an “existential threat to our democracy” reminiscent of the Jim Crow segregationist laws of the past.
He chanted “Shame! Shame! Shame!” at Republicans who were promoting them.
It was the start of an uphill battle by Senate Democrats, who have characterized what they call the For the People Act as the civil rights imperative of modern times, to overcome divisions in their own ranks and steer around Republican opposition to shepherd it into law. Doing so may require them to change Senate rules to eliminate the filibuster, once used by segregationists to block civil rights measures in the 1960s.
Republicans signaled they were ready to fight. Conceding that allowing more people to vote would probably hurt their candidates, they denounced the legislation, passed by the House this month, as a power grab by Democrats intent on federalizing elections to give themselves a permanent political advantage. They insisted that it was the right of states to set their own election laws, including those that make it harder to vote, and warned that Democrats’ proposal could lead to rampant fraud, which experts say has never been found to be widespread.
“This is an attempt by one party to write the rules of our political system,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, who has spent much of his career opposing such changes.
“Talk about ‘shame,’” he added later.
Some Republicans resorted to lies or distortions to condemn the measure, falsely claiming that Democrats were seeking to cheat by enfranchising undocumented immigrants or encouraging illegal voting. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas said the bill aimed to register millions of unauthorized immigrants, though that would remain unlawful under the measure.
The clash laid bare just how sharply the two parties have diverged on the issue of voting rights, which attracted bipartisan support for years after the civil rights movement but more recently has become a bitter partisan battleground. At times, Republicans and Democrats appeared to be wrestling with irreconcilably different views of the problems plaguing the election system.
Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri, the top Republican on the Senate Rules Committee, which convened the hearing, said states were taking appropriate steps to restore public confidence after 2020 by imposing laws that require voters to show identification before voting and limiting so-called ballot harvesting, where others collect voters’ completed absentee ballots and submit them to election officials. He said that if Democrats were allowed to rush through changes on the national level, “chaos will reign in the next election and voters will have less confidence than they currently do.”
The suggestion piqued Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota and the committee chairwoman, who shot back that it was the current elections system — an uneven patchwork of state laws and evolving voting rules — that had caused “chaos” at polling places.
“Chaos is what we’ve seen in the last years — five-hour or six-hour lines in states like Arizona to vote. Chaos is purging names of longtime voters from a voter list so they can’t go vote in states like Georgia,” she said. “What this bill tries to do is to simply make it easier for people to vote and take the best practices that what we’ve seen across the country, and put it into law as we are allowed to do under the Constitution.”
With Republicans unified against them, Democrats’ best hope for enacting the legislation increasingly appears to be to try to leverage its voting protections — to justify triggering the Senate’s so-called nuclear option: the elimination of the filibuster rule requiring 60 votes, rather than a simple majority, to advance most bills.
Even that may be a prohibitively heavy lift, though, at least in the bill’s current form. Liberal activists who are spending tens of millions of dollars promoting it insist that the package must move as one bill. But Senator Joe Manchin III, a centrist West Virginia Democrat whose support they would need both to change the filibuster rules and to push through the elections bill, said on Wednesday that he would not support it in its current form.
Speaking to reporters in the Capitol, Mr. Manchin said he feared that pushing through partisan changes would create more “division” that the country could not afford after the Jan. 6 attack, and instead suggested narrowing the bill.
“There’s so much good in there, and so many things I think all of us should be able to be united around voting rights, but it should be limited to the voting rights,” he said. “We’re going to have a piece of legislation that might divide us even further on a partisan basis. That shouldn’t happen.”
But it is unclear whether even major changes could win Republican support in the Senate. As written, the more than 800-page bill, which passed the House 220 to 210 mostly along party lines, is the most ambitious elections overhaul in generations, chock-full of provisions that experts say would drive up turnout, particularly among minorities who tend to vote Democratic. Many of them are anathema to Republicans.
Its voting provisions alone would create minimum standards for states, neutering voter ID laws, restoring voting rights to former felons, and putting in place requirements like automatic voter registration and no-excuse mail-in balloting. Many of the restrictive laws proposed by Republicans in the states would move in the opposite direction.
The bill would also require states to use independent commissions to draw nonpartisan congressional districts, a change that would weaken the advantages of Republicans who control the majority of state legislatures currently in charge of drawing those maps. It would force super PACs to disclose their big donors and create a new public campaign financing system for congressional candidates.
Democrats also said they still planned to advance a separate bill restoring a key enforcement provision in the Voting Rights Act of 1965, after a 2013 Supreme Court ruling gutted it. The ruling paved the way for many of the restrictive state laws Democrats are now fighting.
In the hearing room on Wednesday, Republicans ticked through a long list of provisions they did not like, including a restructuring of the Federal Election Commission to make it more partisan and punitive, a host of election administration changes they predicted would cause mass “chaos” if carried out and the public campaign financing system.
“This bill is the single most dangerous bill this committee has ever considered,” Mr. Cruz said. “This bill is designed to corrupt the election process permanently, and it is a brazen and shameless power grab by Democrats.”
Mr. Cruz falsely claimed that the bill would register undocumented immigrants to vote and accused Democrats of wanting the most violent criminals to cast ballots, too.
In fact, it is illegal for noncitizens to vote, and the bill would do nothing to change that or a requirement that people registering to vote swear they are citizens. It would extend the franchise to millions of former felons, as some states already do, but only after they have served their sentences.
Though few senators mentioned him by name, Mr. Trump and his false claims of election fraud hung heavily over the debate.
To make their case, Republicans turned to two officials who backed an effort to overturn then-President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s election victory. Mac Warner, the secretary of state of West Virginia, and Todd Rokita, the attorney general of Indiana, both supported a Texas lawsuit late last year asking the Supreme Court to invalidate the election results in key battleground states Mr. Biden won, citing groundless accusations of voting improprieties being spread by Mr. Trump.
On Wednesday, Democrats balked when Mr. Rokita, a former Republican congressman, asserted that their proposed changes would “open our elections up to increased voter fraud and irregularities” like the ones that he said had caused widespread voter mistrust in the 2020 outcome.
Senator Jon Ossoff, a freshman Democrat from Georgia, chastised the attorney general, saying he was spreading misinformation and conspiracies.
“I take exception to the comments that you just made, Mr. Rokita, that public concern regarding the integrity of the recent election is born of anything but a deliberate and sustained misinformation campaign led by a vain former president unwilling to accept his own defeat,” Mr. Ossoff said.
Mr. Rokita merely scoffed and repeated an earlier threat to sue to block the legislation from being carried out should it ever become law, a remedy that many Republican-led states would most likely pursue if Democrats were able to win its enactment.
“You are entitled to your opinion, as misinformed as it may be, but I share the opinion of Americans,” Mr. Rokita said.
Sixty-five percent of voters believe the election was free and fair, according to a Morning Consult poll conducted in late January, but only 32 percent of Republicans believe that.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (93%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); REDISTRICTING (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); ELECTION FRAUD (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); DEMOCRACIES (79%); FILIBUSTER (79%); PARTISANSHIP (79%); US CONGRESS (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (79%); ELECTION LAW (78%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MAIL-IN VOTING (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); GOSSIP & RUMORS (71%); TALKS & MEETINGS (71%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Absentee Voting (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); Voter Fraud (Election Fraud) (%); Rumors and Misinformation (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); Senate (%); House of Representatives (%); States (US) (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); United States Politics and Government (%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (59%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: May 7, 2021

 

End of Document
‘This Is Jim Crow in New Clothes’
The New York Times 
March 19, 2021 Friday 15:51 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1256 words
Byline: Jamelle Bouie
Highlight: Senator Raphael Warnock’s first speech on the Senate floor brought the past into the present.
Body




Senator Raphael Warnock’s first speech on the Senate floor brought the past into the present.
Senator Raphael Warnock gave his first speech on the Senate floor on Wednesday. The subject? Voting rights.
“We are witnessing right now a massive and unabashed assault on voting rights unlike anything we have seen since the Jim Crow era,” Warnock said, pointing to a wave of bills that limit voting in Republican-controlled states like Arizona and his own Georgia. “This is Jim Crow in new clothes.”
He went on:
Politicians in my home state and all across America, in their craven lust for power, have launched a full-fledged assault on voting rights. They are focused on winning at any cost, even the cost of the democracy itself. I submit that it is the job of each citizen to stand up for the voting rights of every citizen. And it is the job of this body to do all that it can to defend the viability of our democracy.
To that end, Warnock argued, the Senate should pass the For the People Act, which would establish automatic voter registration nationally, provide for at least two weeks of early voting and preserve mail-in balloting, as well as the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, which would restore pre-clearance to the Voting Rights Act, forcing covered jurisdictions to submit new voting plans for federal approval.
While these bills are important — I’ve written about them before — I want to set them aside, for now, to focus on the fact of the speech itself. Warnock is the first African-American to represent Georgia in the Senate and only the second elected from the South since Reconstruction. His presence on the Senate floor is historic just on its own. It represents progress — and yet it is also evocative of the past.
A Black lawmaker from the South, urging his mostly white colleagues to defend the voting rights of millions of Americans is, to my mind, an occasion to revisit one particular episode in the history of American democracy: the fight, in Congress, over the Civil Rights Act of 1875. The first Black members of the House of Representatives, some of them former slaves, were prominent in this battle. They saw the bill as vital in the fight against discrimination and race hierarchy. Their arguments still resonate in our own time and found echoes in the Rev. Dr. Warnock’s speech.
The bill that would become the Civil Rights Act of 1875 was first introduced in January 1870 by Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, a Radical Republican and ardent opponent of slavery and race discrimination. As originally written, Sumner’s bill would,
Secure equal rights in railroads, steamboats, public conveyances, hotels, licensed theaters, houses of public entertainment, common schools, and institutions of learning authorized by law, church institutions, and cemetery associations incorporated by national or State authority; also on juries in courts, national and State.
It would, in other words, ban racial discrimination in public accommodations in a way that was similar to what would eventually become law more than nine decades later with the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Sumner struggled to bring the bill to the Senate floor. As the legal scholar Aderson B. Francois explains in his essay, “The Brand of Inferiority: The Civil Rights Act of 1875, White Supremacy and Affirmative Action,” it was blocked in committee in 1871 and then blocked again as an amendment to a different bill the following year, killed by a Democratic filibuster. Sumner tried again in 1873, introducing a modified version of his civil rights bill in conjunction with a similar proposal in the House. This revised bill added a clause that stated that “no citizen of the United States shall, by reason of race, color, or previous condition of servitude, be excepted or excluded from full and equal enjoyment” of “common schools and public institutions of learning, the same being supported by moneys derived from general taxation or authorized by law.”
It was the schools clause that proved especially controversial. Radical Republicans, notes Francois, “viewed school desegregation as a necessary component of achieving a truly colorblind nation.” Their opponents saw school desegregation as collapsing a distinction between public rights and social rights that would allow the government to “invade all provinces of an individual’s life.” When Republicans tried, in 1875, to pass the civil rights bill in a lame duck session of Congress, it was the schools clause that proved impossible to bring across the finish line.
The half-dozen Black members of the House of Representatives were present in these final debates. And as their fellow Republicans struggled to pass the civil rights bill, these lawmakers used the debate to devise what Francois calls a “counter narrative to white supremacy” that repudiated Black inferiority in favor of a “vision of human equality.” They stood before their colleagues and demanded their due as Americans.
“It is not social rights we desire,” Representative John R. Lynch of Mississippi, a former slave, said. “What we ask is protection in the enjoyment of public rights. Rights which are or should be accorded to every citizen alike.”
Representative James T. Rapier of Alabama declared,
I look to the Government in the place of the several States, because it claims my first allegiance, exacts at my hands strict obedience to its laws, and because it promises in the implied contract between every citizen and the Government to protect my life and property. I have fulfilled my part of the contract to the extent I have been called upon, and I demand that the Government, through Congress do the same.
Representative Richard H. Cain of South Carolina was similarly direct:
I want to say we do not come here begging for our rights. We come here clothed in the garb of American citizenship. We come demanding our rights in the name of justice.
We come here, Cain continued,
asking that unjust discriminations against us be forbidden. We come here in the name of justice, equity, and law, in the name of our children, in the name of our country, petitioning for our rights.
The civil rights bill passed Congress in February 1875, nearly a year after Sumner’s death. It did so without the schools clause. Within a decade, the Supreme Court would rule that Congress had no power to outlaw discrimination in public accommodations, killing the law and vastly limiting the scope of the Fourteenth Amendment, which had been ratified in 1868. By the end of the century, Jim Crow was in place throughout most of the former Confederacy. In 1901, George Henry White of North Carolina left Congress after two terms in the House. It would be over 70 years before the South would send another Black American to Washington.
Senator Warnock is part of that legacy. His speech is also part and parcel of a Black tradition of calling on the government to fulfill the nation’s professed values. The question, as always, is whether Congress will actually act to secure democracy for all of its citizens and whether we’ll withstand the inevitable backlash if it does.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); FILIBUSTER (79%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); SLAVERY (78%); ELECTION LAW (77%); FAR RIGHT POLITICS (77%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (77%); VOTER REGISTRATION (77%); MAIL-IN VOTING (72%); POLITICAL EXTREMISM (72%); APPROVALS (65%); Warnock, Raphael G (%); Senate (%); Black People (%); Discrimination (%); Law and Legislation (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Elections, Senate (%); Reconstruction Era (%); Civil Rights and Liberties (%); Georgia (%); Southern States (US) (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%)
 Industry: HOTELS & MOTELS (50%)
 Person: RAPHAEL WARNOCK (93%); JOHN LEWIS (57%); Warnock, Raphael G
 Geographic: GEORGIA, USA (93%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); SOUTHEAST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: March 20, 2021

 

End of Document
What Are Republicans So Afraid Of?
The New York Times 
March 23, 2021 Tuesday 00:03 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 898 words
Byline: Jamelle Bouie
Highlight: Instead of conspiracy-mongering about an election they did well in, they could try to win real majorities.
Body




Instead of conspiracy-mongering about an election they did well in, they could try to win real majorities.
There was a time, in recent memory, when the Republican Party both believed it could win a national majority and actively worked to build one.
Take the last Republican president before Donald Trump, George W. Bush. His chief political adviser, Karl Rove, envisioned a durable Republican majority, if not a permanent one. And Bush would try to make this a reality.
To appeal to moderate suburban voters, Bush would make education a priority and promise a “compassionate conservatism.” To strengthen the party’s hold on white evangelicals, Bush emphasized his Christianity and worked to polarize the country over abortion, same-sex marriage and other questions of sexual ethics and morality. Bush courted Black and Hispanic voters with the promise of homeownership and signed a giveaway to seniors in the form of the Medicare prescription drug benefit. He also made it a point to have a diverse cabinet, elevating figures like Colin Powell, Condoleezza Rice and Alberto Gonzales.
Whether shrewd or misguided, cynical or sincere — or outright cruel and divisive — these gambits were each part of an effort to expand the Republican coalition as far as it could go without abandoning Reaganite conservatism itself. It was the work of a self-assured political movement, confident that it could secure a position as the nation’s de facto governing party.
There is no such ambition, or confidence, in today’s Republican Party.
Convinced, after Trump’s defeat in the 2020 presidential election, that there is no way to win the White House in a diverse electorate with high turnout, Republicans have made it their mission to restrict the vote as much as possible.
Conservative grass-roots and political action groups are joining the crusade, according to reporting by my newsroom colleague Jeremy Peters, galvanized into action by the former president, who blames nonexistent fraud and illegal voting for his defeat. “We’ve got 106 election-related bills that are in 28 states right now,” Tony Perkins, the president of the Family Research Council, told an online town hall of supporters. “So here’s the good news: There is action taking place to go back and correct what was uncovered in this last election.”
Other organizations, like the Heritage Foundation, have pledged to spend millions in support of policies that would limit access to the ballot and keep voters from the polls.
As Peters notes,
Those include laws that would require identification for voters and limit the availability of absentee ballots, as well as other policies that Heritage said would “secure and strengthen state election systems.”
The other side of this effort to restrict the vote is a full-court press against the “For the People Act,” which would pre-empt most Republican voter-suppression bills. “It kind of feels like an all-hands-on-deck moment for the conservative movement, when the movement writ large realizes the sanctity of our elections is paramount and voter distrust is at an all-time high,” Jessica Anderson of Heritage Action for America toldThe Associated Press.
And in a recording of an address to Republican state legislators obtained by the A.P., Senator Ted Cruz of Texas warned that a voter-protection bill would spell the end of the Republican Party as a viable national party. “H.R. 1’s only objective is to ensure that Democrats can never again lose another election, that they will win and maintain control of the House of Representatives and the Senate and of the state legislatures for the next century,” he said.
Some of this is undoubtedly cynical, a brazen attempt to capitalize on the conspiratorial rhetoric of the former president. But some of it is sincere, a genuine belief that the Republican Party will cease to exist if it cannot secure “election integrity.”
What’s striking about all this is that, far from evidence of Republican decline, the 2020 election is proof of Republican resilience, even strength. Trump won more than 74 million votes last year. He made substantial gains with Hispanic voters — reversing more than a decade of Republican decline — and improved with Black voters too. He lost, yes, but he left his party in better-than-expected shape in both the House and the Senate.
If Republicans could break themselves of Trump and look at last November with clear eyes, they would see that their fears of demographic eclipse are overblown and that they can compete — even thrive — in the kinds of high-turnout elections envisioned by voting rights activists.
Indeed, the great irony of the Republican Party’s drive to restrict the vote in the name of Trump is that it burdens the exact voters he brought to the polls. Under Trump, the Republican Party swapped some of the most likely voters — white college-educated moderates — for some of the least likely — blue-collar men.
In other words, by killing measures that make voting more open to everyone, Republicans might make their fears of terminal decline a self-fulfilling prophecy.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (93%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CONSERVATISM (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CONSPIRACY (89%); ELECTION FRAUD (89%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (89%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); BALLOTS (78%); CONSPIRACY THEORY (78%); ETHICS (78%); POLITICS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); MEDICARE (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); RACE & ETHNICITY (75%); COURTSHIP & DATING (74%); GAYS & LESBIANS (73%); POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES (73%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (72%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (72%); RELIGION (70%); MARRIAGE (69%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (62%); SUBURBS (55%); ABORTION (54%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (54%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voter Fraud (Election Fraud) (%); Elections, House of Representatives (%); Elections, Senate (%); Bush, George W (%); Rove, Karl (%); Trump, Donald J (%)
 Industry: MEDICARE (77%); PHARMACY BENEFITS (73%); PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE (53%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (53%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (93%); KARL ROVE (88%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); ALBERTO GONZALES (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); Bush, George W; Rove, Karl; Trump, Donald J
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: March 24, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats take their first steps in what they hope will be big changes to election law.
The New York Times 
March 24, 2021 Wednesday 23:02 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 758 words
Byline: Nicholas Fandos
Highlight: Senator Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, called the voting rollbacks in some states an “existential threat to our democracy” reminiscent of the Jim Crow segregationist laws of the past.
Body




Senator Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, called the voting rollbacks in some states an “existential threat to our democracy” reminiscent of the Jim Crow segregationist laws of the past.
The Senate took its first steps on Wednesday to advance one of Democrats’ top legislative priorities, convening an opening hearing on a sweeping elections bill that would expand voting rights and blunt some Republican state legislators’ efforts to restrict access to the ballot box.
Chock-full of liberal priorities, the bill, called the For the People Act, would usher in landmark changes making it easier to vote, enact new campaign finance laws and end partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts. The legislation passed the House along party lines earlier this month. It faces solid opposition from Republicans who are working to clamp down on ballot access, and who argue that the bill is a power grab by Democrats.
Democrats on the Senate Rules Committee hope that testimony from former Attorney General Eric Holder, prominent voting experts and anti-corruption advocates will help build on a rising drumbeat of support from liberals.
“Today, in the 21st century, there is a concerted, nationwide effort to limit the rights of citizens to vote and to truly have a voice in their own government,” said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader.
He called the voting rollbacks in the states an “existential threat to our democracy” reminiscent of Jim Crow segregationist laws, chanting “Shame! Shame! Shame!” at the Republicans promoting them.
Republicans are equally adamant in their opposition to a measure that promises to be an extraordinarily heavy lift for Democrats. They call it an attempt by Democrats to give themselves a permanent political advantage by driving up turnout among minority groups and by preventing Republicans, who control a majority of statehouses, from drawing new congressional districts this year that would tilt the playing field in their favor.
“This bill is the single most dangerous bill this committee has ever considered,” said Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas. “This bill is designed to corrupt the election process permanently, and it is a brazen and shameless power grab by Democrats.”
He falsely claimed that the bill would register millions of undocumented immigrants to vote and accused Democrats of wanting the most violent criminals to cast ballots, too. In fact, it is illegal for noncitizens to vote, and the bill would do nothing to change that or a requirement that people registering to vote swear they are citizens. It would extend the franchise to millions of former felons, as some states already do, but only after they have served their terms.
So far, not a single Republican supports the nearly 800-page bill, and Democrats are unlikely to win support even from all 50 of their senators without substantial changes.
Democrats’ best hope for enacting the legislation increasingly appears to be to try to leverage its voting protections — which many liberals view as a life-or-death matter not just for American democracy, but for their own political chances in the future — to justify triggering the Senate’s so-called nuclear option: the elimination of the filibuster rule requiring 60 votes, rather than a simple majority, to advance most bills. For now, though, even that remains out of reach as long as conservative Democrats in the 50-50 Senate are opposed.
To make the case against the bill, Republicans turned to two officials who backed an effort to overturn President Biden’s election victory. Mac Warner, the secretary of state of West Virginia, and Todd Rokita, the attorney general of Indiana, both supported a Texas lawsuit late last year asking the Supreme Court to invalidate the election results in key battleground states Mr. Biden won, citing groundless claims of voting fraud and other irregularities being spread by former President Donald J. Trump.
Two former Republican chairmen of the Federal Election Commission also testified in opposition on Wednesday. Republicans were particularly outspoken against changes that would transform the body, which regulates federal elections, from a bipartisan and largely toothless entity into a more partisan and punitive one.
The bill proposes restructuring the F.E.C. from an evenly split bipartisan panel into one with an odd number of members, where a chairman selected by the president would effectively take control.
“Talk about ‘shame,’” said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the minority leader.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (84%); ELECTIONS (79%); FILIBUSTER (79%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (79%); TESTIMONY (79%); BALLOTS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); ELECTION REFORM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (78%); POLITICS (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); LAWYERS (74%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (73%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (72%); CORRUPTION (72%); FELONIES (60%); IMMIGRATION (60%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (53%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (50%)
 Industry: LAWYERS (74%)
 Person: CHARLES SCHUMER (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); ERIC HOLDER (57%)
 Load-Date: March 24, 2021

 

End of Document
Stacey Abrams on American Idealism and American Betrayal
The New York Times 
March 4, 2021 Thursday 14:14 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 253 words
Byline: ‘Sway’
Highlight: Abrams helped win major Democratic victories in Georgia, the right is retaliating and it’s getting personal. But Abrams says she doesn’t mind; it’s all about the long game.
Body




Stacey Abrams’s focus on expanding voter turnout and turning Georgia blue paid off this year when Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock both flipped Senate seats, handing Democrats a slim majority in Congress. Republicans are fighting back quickly and with force, introducing bills to restrict voting in Georgia and 42 other states. Ms. Abrams says she’s combating their efforts by promoting federal legislation like H.R.1, titled the For the People Act, an omnibus election-reform bill that just passed in the House.
[You can listen to this episode of “Sway” on Apple, Spotify, Google or wherever you get your podcasts.]
“That’s the only way we can guarantee that voters can have a say,” she tells Kara Swisher in this “Sway” interview. They also discuss Ms. Abrams’s political playbook, the states she expects will turn blue in 2024 and whether she thinks that the former Georgia senator Kelly Loeffler’s so-called voting rights group shares her mission of expanding voter access.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); VOTERS & VOTING (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); POLITICS (78%); SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); TRANSCRIPTS (77%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); FACT CHECKING (51%); Abrams, Stacey Y (%); Georgia (%); Voting and Voters (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Elections, Senate (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%)
 Company: GOOGLE LLC (56%)
 Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (56%); WEB SEARCH PORTALS (78%); ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (77%); INTERNET BROADCASTING (77%); WEBSITES & PORTALS (77%); SEARCH ENGINES (72%); PODCASTING (55%)
 Person: JON OSSOFF (79%); RAPHAEL WARNOCK (79%); Abrams, Stacey Y
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: June 8, 2021

 

End of Document
