

Stacey Abrams and her group will try to rally young voters of color behind the For the People Act.
The New York Times 
June 8, 2021 Tuesday 14:39 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 592 words
Byline: Nick Corasaniti
Highlight: The effort, called Hot Call Summer, will center on a huge texting campaign, with organizers aiming to reach 10 million voters in key states where Republicans have pushed voting restrictions.
Body




The effort, called Hot Call Summer, will center on a huge texting campaign, with organizers aiming to reach 10 million voters in key states where Republicans have pushed voting restrictions.
Stacey Abrams, the former Georgia Democratic candidate for governor, and the voting organization she leads are beginning a monthlong advocacy campaign to rally young voters of color to support the For the People Act, an expansive federal elections bill.
The effort, called Hot Call Summer, will be anchored in a texting campaign, in which the group aims to reach at least 10 million voters in battleground states that have either passed new laws with restrictions on voting or are advancing such bills. Ms. Abrams’s group, Fair Fight Action, will also host virtual events and fund a paid media campaign to support the push.
“With voting rights under attack in 48 out of 50 state legislatures across the country, the moment has never been more urgent, and it will take all of us to ensure that Congress passes the voting rights protections our country and democracy desperately need,” Ms. Abrams said in an email to supporters that wasobtained earlier by CBS News. She called on supporters in every state to “make sure that EVERY U.S. Senator is hearing from their constituents about the urgent need” to pass the legislation.
The campaign kicks off just days after Senator Joe Manchin III, a moderate Democratic senator from West Virginia, announced that he would not support the federal voting legislation, making passage extremely unlikely in the evenly divided Senate.
Republican-led states across the country are continuing to introduce and pass laws that would erect new barriers to voting. Republicans in Texas have vowed to pass a voting bill in a special session this summer, and voting bills are progressing through the Republican-controlled legislatures in New Hampshire and Michigan.
Ms. Abrams has made voting rights one of her central platforms. In Georgia in 2018, she came within 55,000 votes of being elected the first Black governor in the United States, and within 18,000 votes of forcing a runoff with her Republican rival, Brian Kemp, in an election that drew almost four million ballots. When she ceded to Mr. Kemp, she maintained her allegations that he had used his position as Georgia’s secretary of state to engage in voter suppression.
Ms. Abrams is seen as a likely Democratic candidate for governor in Georgia in 2022. She is scheduled to participate in three virtual town hall events, including one with Katie Hobbs, the Arizona secretary of state and candidate for governor, and Jason Frierson, the Nevada Assembly speaker. Both are Democrats.
The Fair Fight campaign joins other national and state organizational efforts in trying to combat the new voting laws being passed by Republican-controlled legislatures. In Texas, the state Democratic Party announced a program aiming to use at least $13 million to register at least one million new voters.
And later this month, a coalition of voting rights groups organized by Black Voters Matter will embark on a bus stop tour from New Orleans to Washington, D.C., whose name harks back to its inspiration, the integrated bus trips of the Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s: the “Freedom Ride for Voting Rights.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (92%); LEGISLATION (91%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); GOVERNORS (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); TRENDS & EVENTS (77%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (71%); Abrams, Stacey Y (%); Politics and Government (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Elections (%); Fair Fight (Political Organization) (%); Law and Legislation (%)
 Industry: TEXT MESSAGING (90%)
 Person: BRIAN KEMP (79%); JOE MANCHIN (58%); Abrams, Stacey Y
 Geographic: NEVADA, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: June 22, 2021

 

End of Document
Breaking Ranks, Manchin Dooms Key Voting Bill
The New York Times
June 7, 2021 Monday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1872 words
Byline: By Jonathan Weisman
Body




Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, appeared to slam the door on the far-reaching measure when he wrote that he would not vote for any partisan voting bill.
WASHINGTON -- Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia said on Sunday in no uncertain terms that he would not vote for the Democrats' far-reaching bill to combat voter suppression, nor would he ever end the legislative filibuster, a written promise that imperils much of President Biden's agenda. 
  The bill, which all the other Senate Democrats had supported and the party had portrayed as an urgent effort to preserve American democracy, would roll back dozens of laws being passed by Republican state legislatures to limit early and mail-in voting and empower partisan poll watchers. The measure, known as the For the People Act, would also restore many of the ethical controls on the presidency that Donald J. Trump shattered.
  In The Charleston Gazette-Mail, the newspaper of the capital of his home state, Mr. Manchin, a Democrat, wrote: ''I believe that partisan voting legislation will destroy the already weakening binds of our democracy, and for that reason, I will vote against the For the People Act. Furthermore, I will not vote to weaken or eliminate the filibuster.''
  The 818-page bill would end partisan gerrymandering, tighten controls on campaign spending and ease voter registration. It would also force major-party candidates for president and vice president to release 10 years' worth of personal and business tax returns and end the president's and vice president's exemption from conflict-of-interest rules, which allowed Mr. Trump to maintain businesses that profited off his presidency.
  With Mr. Manchin's vow, passage of the full For the People Act appears to be impossible, though parts of it could pass in other ways if Democrats are willing to break up the bill, a move that they have resisted. Mr. Manchin's blockade of filibuster changes makes other Biden initiatives far less likely to pass, including any overhaul of immigration laws, a permanent expansion of the Affordable Care Act, controls of the price of prescription drugs and the most serious efforts to tackle climate change.
  Under Senate rules, 60 votes are needed to end debate and break a filibuster on policy legislation. Republican and Democratic Senates have chipped away at the filibuster, ensuring that most executive branch appointees and judicial nominees can be confirmed with a simple 51-vote majority. A budget rule, called reconciliation, has also been stretched to pass ambitious legislation under the guise of spending and taxation. Major tax cuts pressed by President George W. Bush and Mr. Trump were passed with simple majorities as budget bills, as were parts of the Affordable Care Act and a $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief bill this year.
  But bills that are purely policy oriented are still subject to a 60-vote majority in the Senate, and all 48 Democrats and both liberal-leaning independents would have to align to change that rule. Even if they did, all 50 would have to vote for the voting rights and ethics bill, considering that no Republican is expected to back it.
  Mr. Manchin said instead that he would support passage of another bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, which would restore federal oversight over state-level voting law changes to protect minority groups that might be targeted. He cited one Republican, Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, as a supporter of the measure, which would give the Justice Department powers to police voting rights that the Supreme Court took away in 2013.
  That decision freed nine states, mainly in the South, to change voting laws without pre-approval from Washington. After the 2020 election, many of those states -- and several others -- jumped at the chance, powered by the false claim that voting in November was rife with fraud.
  But Mr. Manchin is still far short of the 60-vote threshold he backs to pass even that bill.
  ''I continue to engage with my Republican and Democratic colleagues about the value of the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act,'' he wrote, ''and I am encouraged by the desire from both sides to transcend partisan politics and strengthen our democracy by protecting voting rights.''
  If Mr. Manchin believes killing the more expansive voting rights bill would make 10 Republicans more altruistic toward the more limited one, he has yet to show any movement on that front.
  ''There may be a path to 60, but it's pretty difficult to see right now, on this day at this hour,'' Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, said on Sunday.
  Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri, praised Mr. Manchin, saying on NBC's ''Meet the Press'' that ''we need to move forward on election reforms in a bipartisan way. I look forward to being a part of that.''
  But he was noncommittal on what he would support.
  ''We'll see what happens with the John Lewis Voting Rights Act and other issues I think we can deal with, and deal with in a way that's less partisan,'' he said.
  The House and Senate versions of the For the People Act were always something of a legislative Hail Mary. Democrats stitched together long-cherished goals such as advancing statehood for the District of Columbia; changes to redistricting laws in anticipation of a redrawing of House districts after the 2020 census; mandating early voting for 15 days before an election, 10 hours a day; and ending voter identification requirements.
  Republicans labeled it a Democratic power grab, and even some members of the Congressional Black Caucus worried that its prohibition on partisan gerrymandering would end up costing Black representation in the South.
  Still, Democrats greeted Mr. Manchin's words incredulously. The senator has made similar points before, but doing so in writing in West Virginia carried new weight. His colleagues acknowledged the tenor of the conversation would change this week as the bill moves to a formal drafting process.
  ''His fidelity and allegiance to the people of West Virginia is beyond question,'' Mr. Blumenthal said. ''But I hope that he will recognize equally the responsibility that each of us has to the nation, and we face an unprecedented threat to voting rights and democracy.''
  House liberals were more scathing. ''Manchin's op-ed might as well be titled 'Why I'll vote to preserve Jim Crow,''' Representative Mondaire Jones, Democrat of New York, wrote on Twitter.
  The White House declined to comment.
  Mr. Manchin's opposition to ending the filibuster and backing strictly Democratic bills could have implications beyond voting rights. He supported the pandemic relief bill this year, which passed on party lines, but Democratic leaders are considering passing other measures under reconciliation, including an infrastructure bill that will most likely top $1 trillion.
  Democrats privately expressed frustration with Mr. Manchin's insistence that even stripped-down bills would need at least one Republican to get his support. Senators had been working on securing Mr. Manchin as a co-sponsor of the For the People Act, getting the bill to a symbolic 50 supporters, pleading with him to tell them what he could accept. But the senator has effectively given Republicans veto power, saying he does not oppose the substance of the legislation, only its lack of bipartisan support.
  Mr. Manchin declined to say how he would vote on a party-line infrastructure bill, saying that a bipartisan group of senators negotiating a deal that could get at least 60 votes were ''not that far apart.''
  ''I still have all the confidence in the world,'' he said on ''Fox News Sunday.'' ''We're going to get there. My goodness, the president has gone from $2.25 trillion down to $1 trillion. The Republicans have come up quite a bit from where they started.''
  Mr. Manchin also laid out what he sees as the path to passing bipartisan legislation in the Senate. Seven Republican senators have voted either to convict Mr. Trump of inciting a mob attack on the Capitol or to create a bipartisan commission to investigate the riot. Mr. Manchin said that paring back Mr. Biden's agenda would add to that group and clear the 60-vote threshold.
  ''We need to work within the framework of what we have,'' Mr. Manchin said on CBS's ''Face the Nation.'' ''We have to keep striving to make sure we can get to that 10.''
  The senator has maintained for months that his opposition to ending the legislative filibuster was in keeping with the wishes of his deceased mentor, Robert C. Byrd, a West Virginia Democrat whose decades-long Senate career was defined by his defense of the institution. In his opinion piece, Mr. Manchin reminded his fellow Democrats that Mr. Trump had urged Republicans to end the filibuster in 2017, and they did not.
  ''Yes, this process can be frustrating and slow,'' Mr. Manchin wrote. ''It will force compromises that are not always ideal. But consider the alternative. Do we really want to live in an America where one party can dictate and demand everything and anything it wants, whenever it wants?''
  But during the Trump presidency, the Republican majority often skirted filibuster rules. The party tried to repeal the entire Affordable Care Act using reconciliation, for instance, but they could not muster the 51 votes. They did pass a steep tax cut that lavished largess on corporations and top earners without a Democratic vote.
  Mr. Manchin was most firm on the voting rights bill, saying that passing it on a party-line vote would further divide the country; state after state is passing voting restrictions along party lines where Republicans control the legislature and governor's office.
  ''I think it's the wrong piece of legislation to bring our country together,'' Mr. Manchin said on Fox. ''I don't want to be in a country that's divided any further than I'm in right now.''
  ''I'm not being naïve,'' he continued, acknowledging that Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, had vowed to block Mr. Biden's agenda. ''We'd be a lot better if we had participation, and we're getting participation, but when it comes time to a final vote ...'' He trailed off.
  He also suggested that Senate Democrats were partly responsible for the current dilemma on the filibuster in the Senate, noting that it was the majority leader at the time, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, who first removed parts of the filibuster in 2013.
  ''What goes around comes around here; they all understand that,'' Mr. Manchin said. ''And there were 33 Democrats in 2017 that signed a letter to 'please save the filibuster and save our democracy.' That's what I'm trying to do.''
  Democrats pushed back on that suggestion, saying the erosion of support for the filibuster on their side stemmed from the abuse of the rule by Republicans. That was capped by a Republican filibuster late last month of the bipartisan commission to investigate the attack on the Capitol by Trump supporters on Jan. 6.
  ''Obviously, I'm disappointed by Senator Manchin's position,'' Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon, said in a statement.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (93%); ELECTION LAW (91%); PARTISANSHIP (91%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); TAX LAW (88%); TAXES & TAXATION (88%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (79%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MAIL-IN VOTING (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (77%); APPOINTMENTS (76%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); IMMIGRATION LAW (70%); US PRESIDENTS (70%); TAX RELIEF (69%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS ASSISTANCE & STIMULUS PLANS (68%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (50%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (50%); DRUG PRICES (50%); IMMIGRATION (50%)
 Industry: BUDGETS (87%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (77%); DRUG PRICES (50%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (50%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (90%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: June 7, 2021

 

End of Document
Joe Manchin Has a Point About Voting Reform
The New York Times
June 12, 2021 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19; GUEST ESSAY
Length: 1441 words
Byline: By Christopher Caldwell
Body




With an opinion piece in The Charleston Gazette-Mail on Sunday, Senator Joe Manchin, Democrat of West Virginia, effectively killed his party's ambitious voting-rights reform twice over. First, he said he would vote against the bill in question -- the so-called For the People Act. (In a Senate split 50-50, his defection looks decisive.) Second, he promised to defend existing Senate filibuster rules, which allow Republicans to prevent the bill from coming to a vote in the first place. 
  For Democrats, the op-ed held more insult than injury. Mr. Manchin's position has been clear for months. What is new is the grounds for it: Low partisanship, he implied, not high ideals, is the source of his colleagues' vision.
  He has a point.
  The vision of voting rights that worries Mr. Manchin was succinctly captured in a communiqué that arrived last month in the inboxes of those who support the Brennan Center for Justice at the N.Y.U. School of Law. New laws proposed or passed in Republican-controlled states -- Georgia, Florida, Texas, Arizona -- have cracked down on early voting, voting by mail and the use of unmanned drop boxes, the email warned. ''Nobody,'' it stressed, ''should erect barriers that would curb the freedom to vote. Period.''
  It is a stirring exhortation, but does it make any sense? Democracy is a system, a set of procedures -- not just a mood or a dream. Barriers and curbs are what it is built out of. If you don't have them, you don't have a democracy. The important thing is that they be reasonable.
  The definition of reasonableness is proving elusive. When Republicans in the Texas Legislature were on the verge of passing their new voting law at the end of May, Democrats staged a walkout, denying the chamber a quorum and stalling the bill's passage. Observers disagree about whether these Texan tactics are protecting democracy or sabotaging it.
  The Democrats who control both houses of the U.S. Congress discuss the conflict over voting in apocalyptic terms. The For the People Act aims to extend the voting practices that Republicans have been curtailing. Democrats describe Republicans' tighter regulation as ''disenfranchisement'' and even ''voter suppression.'' Representative John Sarbanes, the Maryland Democrat who introduced the House version of the For the People Act, H.R. 1, has spoken of the bill as a way of addressing ''the need for comprehensive, structural democracy reform.''
  That is the wrong way to look at the For the People Act. It has none of the hallmarks of a revolution in voting rights. It does not open the vote to new classes of people as the 15th, 19th and 26th Amendments did. Those amendments granted the vote to ex-slaves and nonwhites (1870), women (1920) and 18-year-olds (1971). (The new bill does seek to disqualify states from permanently denying the vote to felons, though that would most likely require a constitutional wrangle over the 14th Amendment.)
  Since real voting-rights breakthroughs, by definition, admit people from outside the political system, they shatter political coalitions and produce bipartisan votes. Women's suffrage did that a century ago. So did civil rights in the 1960s. By contrast, the new election bills, on both sides, are among the most partisan in memory. H.R. 1 got no Republican votes. On initial passage, Texas' Republican-sponsored bill got no Democratic support in either chamber.
  You will find good ideas in the Democrats' bills (like making Election Day a national holiday, and backing up electronic ballots with paper ones, to facilitate recounts) and just as many in the Republicans' (Texas' bans the public funding of third-party ballot distribution). What you won't find is a single innovation that works against the partisan interests of its sponsors. When Mr. Manchin writes in his op-ed that the argument over voting rights ''is not about finding common ground, but seeking partisan advantage,'' he does not lack for evidence.
  Democrats are offering something different than what they say: not an expansion of voting rights but a relaxation of voting regulations. The For the People Act would codify the looser rules many states adopted in order to conduct the 2020 elections in the midst of a pandemic. That election had the largest turnout rate (66.3 percent) since 1900, and strengthened Democrats. But the looser rules were not so much triumphs of reason as concessions to Covid-19. The conditions that made the new rules seem normal or common-sensical no longer obtain. We might want those rules. But we don't need them.
  There is always a paradox when it comes to democratic elections. They must be opaque, in order to guarantee ballot secrecy and prevent intimidation. But they must also be transparent, in order to prevent fraud. The perennial danger is that some actor with a partisan interest might interpose himself in one of the opaque spaces to make the contest less fair.
  At the crudest level, a politician can use private pressure as a way to render himself unaccountable to an electoral verdict. That is what President Donald Trump did when, on Jan. 2, two months after his electoral defeat, he phoned the Georgia secretary of state to seek the reversal of its results in that state. (''Fellas, I need 11,000 votes. Give me a break.'') Certain reforms urged by Democrats are meant to pre-empt abuses and irregularities specific to the Trump era. Title X of H.R. 1, for instance, includes requirements that presidents and vice presidents disclose their tax returns.
  The basic practice that Republicans seek to curb is ballot harvesting: Whenever voting happens elsewhere than at a voting booth, third parties are responsible for conveying voters' intentions to authorities. Obviously, bringing couriers into the voting system can increase turnout -- consider ''shut-in'' older people in nursing homes and elsewhere. Just as obviously, ballot-harvesting increases opportunities for fraud -- consider the same older people, chatting about their voting preferences as they plan to hand their votes to a partisan political activist. Some states authorize only relatives or caregivers to deliver votes; others, like California, have no such restrictions, opening the way for activist groups.
  It is largely to prevent ballot harvesting that most states used to allow absentee voting only in extraordinary circumstances. The prevailing understanding was that, other things being equal, a slightly lower rate of participation was a price worth paying for an election less susceptible to corruption. Absent a pandemic, there is a coherent case that there should never be absentee or mail-in balloting.
  It is striking that reformers in both parties have so little to say directly about what is arguably the biggest problem for the country's electoral integrity: the dragging out of vote-counting till long after Election Day. Nothing did more to escalate tensions in the days immediately following last Nov. 3 than the indeterminate results in Arizona, Georgia, Nevada, North Carolina and Pennsylvania, as Americans waited for who-knows-how-many votes to come in from who-knows-where.
  Except in extraordinary cases like the Florida recount of 2000, there is no valid reason for long counting lags. They seldom happened even when vote counting was much more primitive than it is today.
  An election in which votes are still being received even as counts are being made public is, ipso facto, an election vulnerable to manipulation. When political operatives understand that they need only a few votes from their allies in District X to put them over the top, occasions arise for malfeasance on one side and paranoia on the other. The result can be lawsuits meant to muddy the count, desperate searches for new sources of votes and back-room chicanery of the sort in which Mr. Trump tried to involve the Georgia secretary of state.
  Maintaining wide and equal access to ballots is a democratic necessity. If it were the only necessity, the For the People Act would be unobjectionable, and Mr. Manchin's misgivings idle. But there is a second necessity: simplicity. The public will trust a voting system only to the extent that it is comprehensible and resistant to manipulation. Multiplying the methods, platforms and times of voting adds complexity. And in a democracy, complexity is often corruption waiting to happen.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); ELECTION REFORM (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); DEMOCRACIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); ELECTION LAW (78%); ELECTION MONITORING (78%); MAIL-IN VOTING (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); POLITICS (76%); US CONGRESS (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (67%); STRIKES (61%)
 Industry: LAW SCHOOLS (67%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (90%); ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); JOHN P SARBANES (58%)
 Geographic: TEXAS, USA (93%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 12, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats Unite Behind Voting Rights Overhaul as It Faces a Senate Roadblock
The New York Times
June 22, 2021 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 991 words
Byline: By Nicholas Fandos
Body




With Republicans set to filibuster, Democrats are focusing on staying unified in the face of defeat. But the path ahead for the legislation is murky at best.
WASHINGTON -- A push by Democrats to enact the most expansive voting rights legislation in generations is set to collapse in the Senate on Tuesday, when Republicans are expected to use a filibuster to block a measure that President Biden and his allies in Congress have called a vital step to protect democracy. 
  Despite solid Republican opposition, Democrats plan to bring the voting rights fight to a head on the Senate floor, by calling a test vote to try to advance the broad federal elections overhaul, known as the For the People Act. As Republican-led states rush to enact restrictive new voting laws, Democrats have presented the legislation as the party's best chance to undo them, expand ballot access from coast to coast and limit the effect of special interests on the political process.
  ''We can argue what should be done to protect voting rights and safeguard our democracy, but don't you think we should be able to debate the issue?'' Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader, said on Monday in a last-ditch appeal to Republicans to let the debate proceed.
  But in the hours before the vote, Democrats conceded they were facing defeat -- at least for now. Even if they succeeded in securing the votes of all 50 senators in the Democratic caucus, party leaders were expected to fall well short of the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster and begin debating the bill.
  Instead, they focused on Monday on rallying the party around a more limited alternative proposed by Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, who had been the only Democratic holdout on the voting rights measure. Both the White House and former President Barack Obama said his suggestions would address many of the most urgent issues. President Biden and Mr. Manchin also spoke directly about the need to find a legislative solution, according to an official familiar with their conversation who was not authorized to discuss it publicly.
  Leaders hope that, given the support for his proposal, Mr. Manchin will vote with the rest of the Senate's Democrats and Democratic-aligned independents to allow the debate to proceed, allowing his party to present a unified front on the bill.
  ''What we are measuring, I think, is, is the Democratic Party united? We weren't as of a couple of weeks ago,'' Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, said before acknowledging the vote would fail.
  Mr. Obama offered a tepid endorsement, saying it would address many of his concerns about elections, but ''doesn't have everything I'd like to see in a voting rights bill.''
  Regardless, Mr. Schumer appeared to have only one remaining option to try to pass the legislation: eliminating or altering the Senate rule that sets a 60-vote threshold for breaking a legislative filibuster. Progressives have clamored to do so since Democrats won a narrow majority in January, and argued before Tuesday's vote that it would help make their case. Yet a handful of key moderates led by Mr. Manchin insist they will never go along.
  One of them, Senator Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, dug in further Monday night on the eve of the vote, warning her party in an op-ed in The Washington Post that it would ''lose much more than we gain'' by eliminating the 60-vote threshold.
  ''To those who want to eliminate the legislative filibuster to pass the For the People Act (voting-rights legislation I support and have co-sponsored), I would ask: Would it be good for our country if we did, only to see that legislation rescinded a few years from now and replaced by a nationwide voter-ID law or restrictions on voting by mail in federal elections, over the objections of the minority?'' Ms. Sinema wrote.
  With the path forward so murky, top Democrats began framing Tuesday's vote as a moral victory, and potentially a crucial step in building consensus around eventually blowing up the filibuster.
  The outcome, Ms. Psaki said, ''may change the conversation on the Hill'' around the filibuster, but she offered no clear next steps.
  Mr. Manchin had opposed key planks in the original For the People Act as too intrusive into the rights of states to regulate their own elections. His proposal would eliminate a provision neutering state voter identification laws and strip out a public campaign financing program.
  But it preserves other key measures, like an end to partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts and the creation of tough new ethics rules. It would also expand early voting, make Election Day a federal holiday and make it easier to vote by mail.
  A Monmouth University Poll released on Monday indicated that Mr. Manchin's position may be more in line with public sentiment, particularly his support for some kinds of voter identification requirements.
  The poll found, for instance, that seven in 10 Americans supported making early in person voting easier and were in favor of the federal government creating national guidelines for mail-in and early in person voting. But eight in 10 said they generally supported voter identification requirements that the For the People Act would effectively neuter.
  Republicans are united in their opposition both to Democrats' original bill and to Mr. Manchin's changes, describing them as overly prescriptive and geared toward giving their own party an advantage in future elections.
  ''The real driving force behind S. 1 is the desire to rig the rules of American elections permanently -- permanently -- in Democrats' favor,'' said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the minority leader, referring to the legislation by its bill number. ''That's why the Senate will give this disastrous proposal no quarter.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (95%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); ELECTION REFORM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CAUCUSES (78%); ELECTION LAW (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); US PRESIDENTS (76%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (89%); BARACK OBAMA (78%); JOE MANCHIN (78%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%)
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 22, 2021

 

End of Document
Rethinking a Democratic Agenda as Roadblocks Prove Daunting
The New York Times
June 8, 2021 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 1706 words
Byline: By Jonathan Weisman and Katie Rogers
Body




President Biden and his party searched for a way forward on their ambitious agenda after one of their own, Joe Manchin III, closed the door on ending the filibuster.
WASHINGTON -- President Biden and Senate Democrats confronted a narrowing set of options on Monday for moving ahead with their ambitious agenda, as the reality set in that they would not be able to maneuver past rules that empower Republicans to block most of their legislative proposals. 
  Unequivocal statements from Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia on Sunday that he would oppose a broad voting rights bill and never vote to end the legislative filibuster cast a cloud over a Washington tenuously controlled by Mr. Manchin's party. They forced Democrats to weigh a two-track strategy in which they would be reduced to holding symbolic votes to spotlight Republican intransigence on their highest priorities and limiting their legislative hopes to whatever could be muscled through under fast-track budget reconciliation rules.
  Publicly, Democrats said they were not giving up on the voting rights legislation, nor would they confine their legislative agenda to measures that had significant numbers of Republican supporters. But they conceded that they were rethinking how to move forward in a 50-50 Senate where their most important swing vote had effectively declared that he would not support any measure that lacked Republican support.
  ''Right now we should assume that H.R. 1 is not going to pass the Senate, so we need to figure out what can,'' Senator Brian Schatz, Democrat of Hawaii, said of the voting rights measure, also known as the For the People Act.
  At the White House, Jen Psaki, the press secretary, told reporters on Monday that Mr. Biden believes ''that we need to move forward,'' but could not say how he proposed to do so.
  ''We will stay lock step with Democratic leadership on what that looks like from here, but I don't have anything to preview about the next steps,'' she said.
  Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, has set up a series of votes in the next three weeks that he says will test Republicans' willingness to compromise, including on pay equity between men and women and the voting rights measure. Leaders will also take up Mr. Manchin's suggestion that they proceed on a more limited voting rights bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, though that measure lacks the support of the 10 Republicans who would be needed to advance it past a filibuster.
  ''There is a huge onus on him now to show that this is the case and that he can bring people together to address the problems that he himself identifies as being an issue,'' Zac Petkanas, a Democratic strategist, said of Mr. Manchin. Otherwise, ''he is going to be personally holding up the things that he believes in.''
  If those efforts fall to Republican filibusters, Democrats hope Mr. Manchin and other reluctant party members will revisit their positions.
  ''We do need to start testing this idea that the filibuster promotes bipartisanship,'' said Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut, who is trying to find 10 Republicans to back legislation imposing universal background checks on gun buyers. ''I would hope that everyone is open to having their theories proved wrong if they don't have evidence to prove their theories right.''
  Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, dismissed Democrats' strategy as ''an agenda transparently designed to fail -- and fail they will.''
  For several months, work on a range of issues beyond voting rights, including climate change, immigration and pay equity, was proceeding as if the Senate could change the rules on the filibuster if necessary. A separate effort was underway to bring Mr. Manchin on board as the 50th vote for the voting rights measure.
  On Monday, reality had begun to set in.
  And that reality will mean that where possible, Mr. Biden will have to use executive actions to achieve many of his goals, such as reimposing strict regulations on power plants, automobiles and trucks to combat climate change.
  And Senate Democrats will have to use a budget rule called reconciliation to avoid a Republican filibuster of tax increases, infrastructure projects, measures to combat climate change and social welfare spending on health care, universal preschool and higher education.
  Activist groups could hardly contain their anger.
  ''Joe Manchin should worry about what history will say on where he stood when voting rights were under attack,'' said Stasha Rhodes, an organizer of a coalition pressing for voting rights protections, Just Democracy.
  Mr. Schumer said on Monday that he had no intention of shelving the voting rights bill, which would nullify laws passed by 14 Republican-controlled state legislatures to curtail early and mail-in voting, empower partisan poll watching and give elected legislatures more power over election outcomes. Senate Democrats were to meet on Tuesday to discuss the path forward, the same day Mr. Manchin was set to meet with Derrick Johnson, the president of the N.A.A.C.P., and Marc Morial, the president of the National Urban League, to hear their pleas for his support.
  Regardless of Mr. Manchin's position, Mr. Schumer said a vote would be called the week of June 24, as planned, ''to protect voting rights and American democracy.''
  ''My colleagues need to be put on the record and held accountable,'' Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, said on Monday.
  At the same time, Mr. Biden and Senate Democratic leaders were working to keep Mr. Manchin on board with a push for a major infrastructure package. Mr. Biden was scheduled to speak again on Tuesday with Senator Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia, the lead Republican negotiator, to discuss the scope of an infrastructure bill and how to pay for it. And senators were engaging Mr. Manchin on potential enticements for his vote, such as a long-sought clean manufacturing initiative that has already been incorporated in the Finance Committee's provisions to pay for spending on roads, bridges, tunnels and transit.
  Still, Democrats had to concede that their initial efforts to sway Mr. Manchin on perhaps their highest priority -- the voting rights measure -- had fallen flat after a weekslong effort. Democrats had been pursuing an inside-outside approach, deploying liberal organizations and civil rights activists to pressure Mr. Manchin politically, while small groups of senators reached out to him privately to identify his substantive concerns with the voting rights bill and what could be tweaked or jettisoned to win him over.
  But Mr. Manchin did not lodge any specific policy objections that could be resolved. He simply wanted at least one Republican to support the bill -- effectively handing a veto to the minority party.
  Democrats do have options. They could, for instance, break the For the People Act into separate measures to expand voting rights, rein in campaign finance abuses and restore ethical standards and transparency in the executive branch shattered by Donald J. Trump.
  Mr. Blumenthal said if Mr. Manchin held firm, conversations about legislative strategy would pick up steam, but he stressed that he did not want to break up the bill.
  ''These measures are about ending campaign finance corruption and political self-aggrandizement in a way that is fundamental to preserving our democracy, along with preserving access to the franchise, which is central to our democracy,'' he said. ''Maybe there will be choices ahead, but we need to be very careful about the sacrifices that could be made if we rethink too radically what For the People contains.''
  Another option would be to expand the reach of the voting rights law that Mr. Manchin says he does support, the John Lewis Act, which would restore federal oversight of state voting laws to protect minority groups that might be targeted.
  Other Democrats were looking for any way forward.
  ''The stakes are really high right now; this country is having a conversation with itself about whether we want to be a democracy,'' Mr. Murphy said.
  ''Do we have to pass every single provision in the For the People Act to save democracy?'' he added. ''No, but we're getting closer to a scenario in which we do none of it, and that is potentially cataclysmic.''
  Presidential advisers warned that there was little more Mr. Biden could do to expand voting freedoms outside of an executive order he issued in March. Other executive orders on hot-button issues like gun control have been tried with little effect.
  White House officials also pointed out that there were areas of cooperation to be found: The Senate is poised to confirm the first round of federal judges nominated by Mr. Biden this week, as well as pass a huge piece of industrial policy legislation meant to curb the competitive threat from China.
  In a lengthy statement that outlined several of Mr. Biden's policy successes, Andrew Bates, a White House spokesman, said the president ''and his team are continuing to put their all into his legislative agenda every single day.''
  But liberal Democrats and voting rights groups on Monday flashed frustration, not just with Mr. Manchin but with the White House, which they see as insufficiently engaged in an issue that they believe has democracy in the balance. The nightmare scenario liberals are putting forward is that Republicans seize control of Congress and expand their control over state governments next year, in part because of restrictive voting laws. Then they use their new power to nullify the results of close state contests in 2024 to deliver the White House back to the G.O.P.
  Last week, Mr. Biden directed Vice President Kamala Harris to pursue voting rights protections. She promptly headed to Central America to deal with her other big issue, the surge of migrants at the southwestern border.
  ''He said he'd use every tool at his disposal and he would 'fight like heck,''' Stephen Spaulding, the senior counsel for public policy and government affairs at the voting rights group Common Cause, said about Mr. Biden's recent remarks about advancing the For the People Act through the Senate. ''Now is the time.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (92%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); GENDER EQUALITY (75%); EQUAL PAY (60%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (89%); JOE BIDEN (79%); BRIAN SCHATZ (58%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); JOHN LEWIS (56%)
 Geographic: HAWAII, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 8, 2021

 

End of Document
A Bill Destined to Fail May Now Spawn More Plausible Options; News analysis
The New York Times 
June 23, 2021 Wednesday 09:59 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1553 words
Byline: Nate Cohn
Highlight: The For the People Act had little chance of testing the limits of what, if anything, is still possible in Washington. Oddly, it was so far from passage that it may provide some hope, because so many avenues remain to be pursued.
Body




The For the People Act had little chance of testing the limits of what, if anything, is still possible in Washington. Oddly, it was so far from passage that it may provide some hope, because so many avenues remain to be pursued.
The demise of the For the People Act — the far-reaching voting rights bill that Republicans blocked in the Senate on Tuesday — will come as a crushing blow to progressives and reformers, who have portrayed the law as an essential tool for saving democracy.
But it was a flawed bill that had little chance of testing the limits of what, if anything, is still possible in Washington. Voting rights activists and Democratic lawmakers may even find that the collapse of this law opens up more plausible, if still highly unlikely, paths to reform.
The law, known as H.R. 1 or S. 1, was full of hot-button measures — from public financing of elections to national mail voting — that were only tangentially related to safeguarding democracy, and all but ensured its failure in the Senate. Its supporters insisted the law should set the floor for voting rights; in truth, it set the floor at the ceiling, by guaranteeing a level of voting access that would be difficult to surpass.
At the same time, reformers did not add provisions to tackle the most insidious and serious threat to democracy: election subversion, where partisan election officials might use their powers to overturn electoral outcomes.
Instead, it focused on the serious but less urgent issues that animated reformers at the time the bill was first proposed in 2019: allegations of corruption in the Trump administration, the rise of so-called dark money in the aftermath of the Supreme Court’s decision in Citizens United, or the spate of voter identification laws passed in the aftermath of President Barack Obama’s election victories.
Even a cursory look at the effort by former President Donald J. Trump to subvert the 2020 election revealed a number of vulnerabilities in the electoral system, from the risk that a partisan election administrator might simply refuse to certify an unfavorable election result to the possibility that a vice president might choose not to count a certified electoral slate. None of those vulnerabilities were addressed.
Those concerns have only escalated over the last several months as Republicans have advanced bills that not only imposed new limits on voting, but also afforded the G.O.P. greater control over election administration. The new powers include the ability to strip secretaries of state of some of their authority and remove members of local election boards. The New York Times reported over the weekend how some Democrats on local boards in Georgia, including people of color, were losing their positions.
It’s true that the 2020 election and Mr. Trump’s unprecedented attempt to undermine it revealed the fragility of American democracy in different and more fundamental ways than even the most perspicacious legislator could have anticipated. Originally, the bill was seen as a “political statement,” a progressive “wish list” or a “messaging bill,” not as the basis for a realistic legislative effort.
It was not designed to appeal to the moderate Senate Democrats, who progressives nonetheless hoped would eliminate the filibuster even as they insisted on different proposals and a bipartisan approach.
Yet oddly, the bill was so far from passage that reformers still have cause for some semblance of hope. Nearly every stone was left unturned.
As a result, many other avenues for reform remain to be pursued. None seem likely to be enacted in today’s political climate. All are more plausible than the bill that died in the Senate on Tuesday.
One of those avenues emerged in the final days of the push for H.R. 1: a grand bargain, like the one recently suggested by Joe Manchin III, the moderate Democratic senator from West Virginia who provoked outrage among progressives when he said he would oppose the bill in its current form.
The Manchin compromise resembles H.R. 1 in crucial ways. It does not address election subversion any more than H.R. 1 does. And it still seeks sweeping changes to voting, ethics, campaign finance and redistricting law. But it offers Republicans a national voter identification requirement, while relenting on many of the provisions that provoke the most intense Republican opposition.
Mr. Manchin’s proposal nonetheless provoked intense Republican opposition. Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri derided it as a “Stacey Abrams” bill. Mitch McConnell, the minority leader from Kentucky, appeared to suggest that no federal election law would earn his support.
More generally, it is hard to imagine how Republicans could be enticed to accept stringent limits on gerrymandering, given the lopsided partisan consequences of such a ban.
But the strategy behind the Manchin proposal could nonetheless serve as a basis for serious legislative efforts: Democrats can offer Republicans provisions they actually want on voting, like new photo identification requirements, and see what that buys them.
The willingness of Ms. Abrams, who leads the Georgia-based voting rights group Fair Fight, to support the Manchin compromise, despite its embrace of voter ID measures — an archetypal voter suppression provision — suggests that there may be room to explore options that might attract support from Republicans and haven’t previously been considered.
Another avenue is a version of the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, which would again subject Southern states to obtain federal clearance before making changes to their voting system — a requirement that a 2013 Supreme Court decision gutted.
Restoring the preclearance condition is of considerable symbolic significance, but it offers far less to reformers than the Manchin compromise. It does nothing to address the laws that Republicans have enacted this year. It would do little to protect against election subversion. It does not check Republican efforts outside the South. And it relies on the federal court system, which has a more limited view of the Voting Rights Act than reformers would like.
But unlike H.R. 1, restoring federal preclearance does have the support of Mr. Manchin and Lisa Murkowski, a Republican from Alaska. Mr. Manchin also seemed willing to embrace a variety of largely unspecified changes that might make preclearance somewhat more amenable to the Republicans, including an objective test to determine whether jurisdictions should be subjected to or relieved from preclearance and limits on the power of the attorney general. It remains doubtful that any changes would attract significant Republican support, but it also remains untested.
A final avenue is an even narrower bill, comprising only provisions that attract bipartisan support. It remains to be seen whether even a single idea falls into this category. But many of the hypothesized proposals for addressing election subversion might have some chance to find Republican support, like reforms to the rules for counting electoral votes, and funding for election administration.
Other potential areas of agreement are a requirement for paper ballots; ballot chain-of-custody requirements; standards for certification of federal elections and establishing voter eligibility; and clarifying whether and when judges or local officials can defy a state legislature.
None of these proposals necessarily advantage either political party. All would have a chance to avoid the central, politicized debate over voter suppression and voting rights.
Realistically, even the most innocuous proposals would have a challenging path to passage. The window for bipartisan cooperation on these issues may have closed several months ago, as memories of the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol by Trump supporters were supplanted by politically charged fights over voting rights and voter suppression. Republicans have few incentives to support a bill, even if watered down considerably.
Yet all of these new avenues for reformers have something simple in common: They involve an earnest attempt to win 60 votes in the Senate, something that H.R. 1 did not. Many progressives scoff at the idea, but if moderate Democrats can be taken at their word, then reformers never had a choice but to at least try to find Republican support.
Voting rights activists on Tuesday called for a new push to ensure voting rights, and Senator Chuck Schumer, the majority leader from New York, pledged to keep fighting, calling the Senate vote “the starting gun, not the finish line.”
Perhaps reformers will surprise themselves and pull off a rare legislative win. More likely, their effort will fail and they can hope that their failure will demonstrate the impossibility of bipartisanship to Senate moderates, perhaps reopening the conversation about eliminating the filibuster.
Wherever the effort might end, a more realistic legislative push begins with an earnest effort to write a bill that is more responsive to the current threats to the system and is designed to win enough votes to pass.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: DEMOCRACIES (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (89%); ELECTION LAW (89%); PARTISANSHIP (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (89%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); US ELECTORAL COLLEGE (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); ELECTION WORKERS (76%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (76%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (76%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (76%); POLITICS (76%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (76%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (76%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (76%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (71%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (71%); MAIL-IN VOTING (71%); VOTER REGISTRATION (71%); RACE & ETHNICITY (62%); CORRUPTION (50%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Law and Legislation (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Democratic Party (%); Senate (%); Abrams, Stacey Y (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Voting and Voters (%); Republican Party (%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); JOE MANCHIN (71%); Abrams, Stacey Y; Manchin, Joe III; Trump, Donald J
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: July 19, 2021

 

End of Document
G.O.P. Blocks Bill On Voting Rights
The New York Times
June 23, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1897 words
Byline: By Nicholas Fandos
Body




All 50 G.O.P. senators opposed the sweeping elections overhaul, leaving a long-shot bid to eliminate the filibuster as Democrats' best remaining hope to enact legal changes.
WASHINGTON -- Republicans on Tuesday blocked the most ambitious voting rights legislation to come before Congress in a generation, dealing a blow to Democrats' attempts to counter a wave of state-level ballot restrictions and supercharging a campaign to end the legislative filibuster. 
  President Biden and Democratic leaders said the defeat was only the beginning of their drive to steer federal voting rights legislation into law, and vowed to redouble their efforts in the weeks ahead.
  ''In the fight for voting rights, this vote was the starting gun, not the finish line,'' said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader. ''We will not let it go. We will not let it die. This voter suppression cannot stand.''
  But the Republican blockade in the Senate left Democrats without a clear path forward, and without a means to beat back the restrictive voting laws racing through Republican-led states. For now, it will largely be left to the Justice Department to decide whether to challenge any of the state laws in court -- a time-consuming process with limited chances of success -- and to a coalition of outside groups to help voters navigate the shifting rules.
  Democrats' best remaining hope to enact legal changes rests on a long-shot bid to eliminate the legislative filibuster, which Republicans used on Tuesday to block the measure, called the For the People Act. Seething progressive activists pointed to the Republicans' refusal to even allow debate on the issue as a glaring example of why Democrats in the Senate must move to eliminate the rule and bypass the G.O.P. on a range of liberal priorities while they still control Congress and the presidency.
  They argued that with former President Donald J. Trump continuing to press the false claim that the election was stolen from him -- a narrative that many Republicans have perpetuated as they have pushed for new voting restrictions -- Democrats in Congress could not afford to allow the voting bill to languish.
  ''The people did not give Democrats the House, Senate and White House to compromise with insurrectionists,'' Representative Ayanna Pressley, Democrat of Massachusetts, wrote on Twitter. ''Abolish the filibuster so we can do the people's work.''
  Liberal activists promised a well-funded summertime blitz, replete with home-state rallies and million-dollar ad campaigns, to try to ramp up pressure on a handful of Senate Democrats opposed to changing the rules. Mounting frustration with Republicans could accelerate a growing rift between liberals and more moderate lawmakers over whether to try to pass a bipartisan infrastructure and jobs package or move unilaterally on a far more ambitious plan.
  But key Democratic moderates who have defended the filibuster rule -- led by Senators Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona -- appeared unmoved and said their leaders should try to find narrower compromises, including on voting and infrastructure bills.
  Ms. Sinema dug in against eliminating the filibuster on the eve of the vote, writing an op-ed in The Washington Post defending the 60-vote threshold. Without the rule there to force broad consensus, she argued, Congress could swing wildly every two years between enacting and then reversing liberal and conservative agenda items.
  ''The filibuster is needed to protect democracy, I can tell you that,'' Mr. Manchin told reporters on Tuesday.
  In their defeat, top Democrats appeared keen to at least claim Republicans' unwillingness to take up the bill as a political issue. They planned to use it in the weeks and months ahead to stoke enthusiasm with their progressive base by highlighting congressional Republicans' refusal to act to preserve voting rights at a time when their colleagues around the country are racing to clamp down on ballot access.
  ''Once again, Senate Republicans have signed their names in the ledger of history alongside Donald Trump, the big lie and voter suppression -- to their enduring disgrace,'' Mr. Schumer said. ''This vote, I'm ashamed to say, is further evidence that voter suppression has become part of the official platform of the Republican Party.''
  Democrats' bill, which passed the House in March, would have ushered in the largest federally mandated expansion of voting rights since the 1960s, ended the practice of partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts, forced super PACs to disclose their big donors and created a new public campaign financing system.
  It would have pushed back against more than a dozen Republican-led states that have enacted laws that experts say will make it harder for people of color and young people to vote, or shift power over elections to G.O.P. legislators. Other states appear poised to follow suit, including Texas, whose Republican governor on Tuesday called a special legislative session in July, when lawmakers are expected to complete work on a voting bill Democrats temporarily blocked last month.
  After months of partisan wrangling over the role of the federal government in elections, the outcome on Tuesday was hardly a surprise to either party. All 50 Senate Democrats voted to advance the federal legislation and open debate on other competing voting bills. All 50 Republicans united to deny it the 60 votes needed to overcome the filibuster, deriding it as a bloated federal overreach.
  Republicans never seriously considered the legislation, or a narrower alternative proposed in recent days by Mr. Manchin. They mounted an aggressive campaign in congressional committees, on television and finally on the floor to portray the bill as a self-serving federalization of elections to benefit Democrats. They called Democrats' warnings about democracy hyperbolic. And they defended their state counterparts, including arguments that the laws were needed to address nonexistent ''election integrity'' issues Mr. Trump raised about the 2020 election.
  Senate Republicans particularly savaged provisions restructuring the Federal Election Commission to avoid deadlocks and the proposed creation of a public campaign financing system for congressional campaigns.
  ''These same rotten proposals have sometimes been called a massive overhaul for a broken democracy, sometimes just a modest package of tweaks for a democracy that's working perfectly and sometimes a response to state actions, which this bill actually predates by many years,'' said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the minority leader. ''But whatever label Democrats slap on the bill, the substance remains the same.''
  His top deputy, Senator John Thune of South Dakota, also threw cold water on any suggestion the two parties could come together on a narrower voting bill as long as Democrats wanted Congress to overpower the states.
  ''I don't think there's anything I've seen yet that doesn't fundamentally change the way states conduct elections,'' he said. ''It's sort of a line in the sand for most of our members.''
  At more than 800 pages, the For the People Act was remarkably broad. It was first assembled in 2019 as a compendium of long-sought liberal election changes and campaign pledges that had energized Democrats' anti-corruption campaign platform in the 2018 midterm elections. At the time, Democrats did not control the Senate or the White House, and so the bill served more as a statement of values than a viable piece of legislation.
  When Democrats improbably won control of them, proponents insisted that what had essentially been a messaging bill become a top legislative priority. But the approach was always flawed. Mr. Manchin did not support the legislation, and other Democrats privately expressed concerns over key provisions. State election administrators from both parties said some of its mandates were simply unworkable (Democrats proposed tweaks to alleviate their concerns). Republicans felt little pressure to back a bill of its size and partisan origins.
  Democratic leaders won Mr. Manchin's vote on Tuesday by agreeing to consider a narrower compromise proposal he drafted in case the debate had proceeded. Mr. Manchin's alternative would have expanded early and mail-in voting, made Election Day a federal holiday, and imposed new campaign and government ethics rules. But it cut out proposals slammed by Republicans, including one that would have neutered state voter identification laws popular with voters and another to set up a public campaign financing system.
  Mr. Manchin was not the only Democrat keen on Tuesday to project a sense of optimism and purpose, even as the party's options dwindled. Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, announced she would use her gavel on the Rules Committee to hold a series of hearings on election issues, including a field hearing in Georgia to highlight the state's restrictive new voting law.
  Vice President Kamala Harris, who asked to take the lead on voting issues for Mr. Biden, spent the afternoon on Capitol Hill trying to drum up support for the bill and craft some areas of bipartisan compromise. She later presided over the vote.
  ''The fight is not over,'' she told reporters afterward.
  Facing criticism from party activists who accused him of taking too passive a role on the issue, Mr. Biden said he would have more to say on the issue next week but vowed to fight on against the dawning of a ''Jim Crow era in the 21st century.''
  ''I've been engaged in this work my whole career, and we are going to be ramping up our efforts to overcome again -- for the people, for our very democracy,'' he said in a statement.
  But privately, top Democrats in Congress conceded they had few compelling options and dwindling time to act -- particularly if they cannot persuade all 50 of their members to scrap the filibuster rule. The Senate will leave later this week for a two-week break. When senators return, Democratic leaders, including Mr. Biden, are eager to quickly shift to consideration of an infrastructure and jobs package that could easily consume the rest of the summer.
  They have also been advised by Democratic elections lawyers that unless a voting overhaul is signed into law by Labor Day, it stands little chance of taking effect before the 2022 midterm elections.
  Both the House and the Senate are still expected to vote this fall on another marquee voting bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. The bill would put teeth back into a key provision of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that made it harder for jurisdictions with a history of discrimination to enact voting restrictions, which was invalidated by the Supreme Court in 2013. While it does have some modest Republican support, it too appears to be likely doomed by the filibuster.
  ''This place can always make you despondent,'' said Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut. ''The whole exercise of being a member of this body is convincing yourself to get up another day to convince yourself that the fight is worth engaging in. But yeah, this certainly feels like an existential fight.''
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (95%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (94%); POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); ELECTION LAW (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); US CONGRESS (73%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (51%)
 Industry: MARKETING & ADVERTISING (71%); MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (71%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); AYANNA PRESSLEY (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%)
 Geographic: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 23, 2021

 

End of Document
Manchin’s Bipartisan Ultimatum Becomes a Democratic Stumbling Block; On Politics
The New York Times 
June 7, 2021 Monday 16:52 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1455 words
Byline: Giovanni Russonello
Highlight: Senator Joe Manchin’s push to have the parties work together has become a major obstacle for Democratic legislation on voting rights and other issues.
Body




Senator Joe Manchin’s push to have the parties work together has become a major obstacle for Democratic legislation on voting rights and other issues.
Six months into his role as majority leader, Senator Chuck Schumer is still trying to get Democrats’ legislative agenda into full gear. But the Senate Democratic caucus has a built-in brake system. Its name is Joe Manchin III.
And on Sunday, Mr. Manchin made it clearer than ever that he was uninterested in helping the Democrats get to cruising speed.
In an opinion essay in his hometown newspaper, The Charleston Gazette-Mail, Mr. Manchin declared that he would vote against the Democrats’ sweeping voting-rights bill called the For the People Act, and he promised in no uncertain terms to oppose eliminating or reforming the filibuster.
The announcement, though not altogether a surprise, dealt a crushing blow to the hopes of most Democratic lawmakers, who had seen the upcoming summer session as their big opportunity to advance the party’s ambitious goals — on voting rights and beyond. (After the chamber adjourns for the August recess, much attention will turn toward next year’s midterm elections.)
It also serves to clarify where the goal posts may lie on a variety of issues, as Mr. Manchin stands firmly against allowing his party to legislate freely without buy-in from Republicans.
“I will not vote to weaken or eliminate the filibuster,” he wrote. “For as long as I have the privilege of being your U.S. senator, I will fight to represent the people of West Virginia, to seek bipartisan compromise no matter how difficult and to develop the political bonds that end divisions and help unite the country we love.”
After Mr. Manchin published his essay, Mr. Schumer tried to sound an optimistic note by mentioning two areas where legislative proposals might soon get a vote in the Senate: gun control and L.G.B.T.Q. rights. But there is little certainty about whether those bills could pass at this point.
The same is true of some of the biggest-ticket Democratic priorities in the weeks and months ahead. Here’s a look at where things stand on four of President Biden, Mr. Schumer and Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s main goals, in light of Mr. Manchin’s ultimatum of bipartisanship.
Voting rights
The most immediate (likely) casualty is the For the People Act. It is known as S. 1 in the Senate and H.R. 1 in the House, reflecting its pride of place among Democratic leaders, who consider it to be an existential necessity as Republicans in state legislatures across the country pass laws that restrict voting access and may make it easier for state lawmakers to challenge or invalidate election results they find unfavorable.
In his essay, Mr. Manchin aimed most of his darts at fellow Democrats, branding the For the People Act as a partisan power grab. This is the main argument against the legislation used by Republicans to give cover to the state-level bills, including Senator Mitch McConnell, who has said S. 1 is “designed to advantage one side and disadvantage the other.”
Mr. Manchin wrote, “Today’s debate about how to best protect our right to vote and to hold elections, however, is not about finding common ground, but seeking partisan advantage.”
He went on to explain himself more fully: “I have always said, ‘If I can’t go home and explain it, I can’t vote for it.’ And I cannot explain strictly partisan election reform or blowing up the Senate rules to expedite one party’s agenda.”
Representative Jamaal Bowman, a liberal Democrat from New York, accused Mr. Manchin of doing Mr. McConnell’s job for him. “Joe Manchin has become the new Mitch McConnell,” Mr. Bowman said during an appearance on CNN.
“Mitch McConnell, during Obama’s presidency, said he would do everything in his power to stop Obama — he’s also repeated that now during the Biden presidency,” he added. “Now Joe Manchin is doing everything in his power to stop democracy and to stop our work for the people, the work that the people sent us here to do.”
Mr. Manchin has said that while he’s opposed to S. 1, he would support a version of the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, which seeks to restore provisions of the 1965 Voting Rights Act invalidated by the Supreme Court in 2013, but it would do little to turn back the laws already passed by Republican legislatures.
Infrastructure and climate
Voting rights is far from the only issue on which Mr. Manchin has said he wants bipartisan agreement. He’s also brandished the demand for bipartisanship against Mr. Biden’s major domestic-policy priority: investment in infrastructure.
Mr. Manchin has said that he strongly supports federal legislation to support jobs and strengthen the country’s infrastructure, though he objects to elements of Mr. Biden’s $2 trillion American Jobs Plan, including raising the corporate tax rate to 28 percent.
The White House has been in talks with the other senator from West Virginia — Shelley Moore Capito, a Republican — seeking a compromise proposal. There have been stops and starts in recent days, but Ms. Capito and Mr. Biden are continuing their meetings this week, and Mr. Manchin has described himself as encouraged by the seemingly good-faith negotiations. “I still have all the confidence in the world,” he said on Fox News yesterday. “My goodness, the president has gone from $2.25 trillion down to $1 trillion. The Republicans have come up quite a bit from where they started.”
He and seven other senators — including the Republicans Mitt Romney and Rob Portman, and Kyrsten Sinema, a Democrat — are at work separately on a compromise bill that could provide a fallback option in case Ms. Capito’s talks fail.
It would also be a way for Mr. Manchin to keep the pressure on Mr. Biden to negotiate further with Republicans, rather than passing an ambitious bill with only Democratic support.
An infrastructure bill could become law through the budgetary reconciliation process, meaning that only Democratic votes would be needed. But Mr. Manchin would have to agree to that, and so far he hasn’t.
Democratic leaders have also floated the idea of passing a smaller-scale, bipartisan infrastructure bill and then following that with a larger, Democratic-only bill that expands upon it.
Competing with China
The Senate’s most immediate legislative priority is also the rare bill on the docket that’s now expected to gather bipartisan support. The Endless Frontier Act, which would invest almost a quarter of a trillion dollars in U.S. industries, is being framed as an attempt to directly beef up U.S. competitiveness with Chinese state-backed manufacturers.
The Senate could vote on the bill as early as tomorrow. On the campaign trail last year, Democrats and Republicans often sought to outdo each other on anti-China language, and senators in both parties have expressed support for legislation aimed at taking on a country that’s seen as America’s fastest-rising economic rival.
The legislation would invest $52 billion in subsidizing semiconductor manufacturers in the U.S., and an additional $195 billion would go toward scientific research and development.
Police reform
After more than a year of renewed protests against racism in law enforcement, senators in both parties have indicated that they would back a police reform bill. But the details remain sketchy, and finding at least 10 Republican votes would be an uphill climb, considering the staunch opposition of police unions across the country to most of the provisions being discussed.
In March, the House passed the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, which would ban certain practices like chokeholds and take steps to increase accountability for officers charged with wrongdoing.
That bill garnered virtually no Republican support in the House, and Senator Tim Scott — the only Black Republican in the Senate and the G.O.P.’s point person on police reform — has committed to working with Democrats toward a compromise. It is unlikely that Republicans would support some of the provisions most sought by activists, particularly a rollback of qualified immunity, the Supreme Court doctrine that prevents most kinds of civil suits against accused officers.
Mr. Manchin, for his part, has been tight-lipped on his support for the bill. Activists have gone as far as reading his name aloud at protests, encouraging activists to phone Mr. Manchin’s office and urge him to support the legislation.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); CAUCUSES (79%); ELECTIONS (79%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (79%); PARTISANSHIP (79%); US CONGRESS (79%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); GUN CONTROL (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (73%); CONTESTED ELECTIONS (60%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Democratic Party (%); Law and Legislation (%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); JOE MANCHIN (90%); CHARLES SCHUMER (79%); Manchin, Joe III; Biden, Joseph R Jr
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 11, 2021

 

End of Document
Republicans Block Voting Rights Bill, Dealing Blow to Biden and Democrats
The New York Times 
June 22, 2021 Tuesday 11:06 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1927 words
Byline: Nicholas Fandos
Highlight: All 50 G.O.P. senators opposed the sweeping elections overhaul, leaving a long-shot bid to eliminate the filibuster as Democrats’ best remaining hope to enact legal changes.
Body




All 50 G.O.P. senators opposed the sweeping elections overhaul, leaving a long-shot bid to eliminate the filibuster as Democrats’ best remaining hope to enact legal changes.
WASHINGTON — Republicans on Tuesday blocked the most ambitious voting rights legislation to come before Congress in a generation, dealing a blow to Democrats’ attempts to counter a wave of state-level ballot restrictions and supercharging a campaign to end the legislative filibuster.
President Biden and Democratic leaders said the defeat was only the beginning of their drive to steer federal voting rights legislation into law, and vowed to redouble their efforts in the weeks ahead.
“In the fight for voting rights, this vote was the starting gun, not the finish line,” said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader. “We will not let it go. We will not let it die. This voter suppression cannot stand.”
But the Republican blockade in the Senate left Democrats without a clear path forward, and without a means to beat back the restrictive voting laws racing through Republican-led states. For now, it will largely be left to the Justice Department to decide whether to challenge any of the state laws in court — a time-consuming process with limited chances of success — and to a coalition of outside groups to help voters navigate the shifting rules.
Democrats’ best remaining hope to enact legal changes rests on a long-shot bid to eliminate the legislative filibuster, which Republicans used on Tuesday to block the measure, called the For the People Act. Seething progressive activists pointed to the Republicans’ refusal to even allow debate on the issue as a glaring example of why Democrats in the Senate must move to eliminate the rule and bypass the G.O.P. on a range of liberal priorities while they still control Congress and the presidency.
They argued that with former President Donald J. Trump continuing to press the false claim that the election was stolen from him — a narrative that many Republicans have perpetuated as they have pushed for new voting restrictions — Democrats in Congress could not afford to allow the voting bill to languish.
“The people did not give Democrats the House, Senate and White House to compromise with insurrectionists,” Representative Ayanna Pressley, Democrat of Massachusetts, wrote on Twitter. “Abolish the filibuster so we can do the people’s work.”
Liberal activists promised a well-funded summertime blitz, replete with home-state rallies and million-dollar ad campaigns, to try to ramp up pressure on a handful of Senate Democrats opposed to changing the rules. Mounting frustration with Republicans could accelerate a growing rift between liberals and more moderate lawmakers over whether to try to pass a bipartisan infrastructure and jobs package or move unilaterally on a far more ambitious plan.
But key Democratic moderates who have defended the filibuster rule — led by Senators Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona — appeared unmoved and said their leaders should try to find narrower compromises, including on voting and infrastructure bills.
Ms. Sinema dug in against eliminating the filibuster on the eve of the vote, writing an op-ed in The Washington Post defending the 60-vote threshold. Without the rule there to force broad consensus, she argued, Congress could swing wildly every two years between enacting and then reversing liberal and conservative agenda items.
“The filibuster is needed to protect democracy, I can tell you that,” Mr. Manchin told reporters on Tuesday.
In their defeat, top Democrats appeared keen to at least claim Republicans’ unwillingness to take up the bill as a political issue. They planned to use it in the weeks and months ahead to stoke enthusiasm with their progressive base by highlighting congressional Republicans’ refusal to act to preserve voting rights at a time when their colleagues around the country are racing to clamp down on ballot access.
“Once again, Senate Republicans have signed their names in the ledger of history alongside Donald Trump, the big lie and voter suppression — to their enduring disgrace,” Mr. Schumer said. “This vote, I’m ashamed to say, is further evidence that voter suppression has become part of the official platform of the Republican Party.”
Democrats’ bill, which passed the House in March, would have ushered in the largest federally mandated expansion of voting rights since the 1960s, ended the practice of partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts, forced super PACs to disclose their big donors and created a new public campaign financing system.
It would have pushed back against more than a dozen Republican-led states that have enacted laws that experts say will make it harder for people of color and young people to vote, or shift power over elections to G.O.P. legislators. Other states appear poised to follow suit, including Texas, whose Republican governor on Tuesday called a special legislative session in July, when lawmakers are expected to complete work on a voting bill Democrats temporarily blocked last month.
After months of partisan wrangling over the role of the federal government in elections, the outcome on Tuesday was hardly a surprise to either party. All 50 Senate Democrats voted to advance the federal legislation and open debate on other competing voting bills. All 50 Republicans united to deny it the 60 votes needed to overcome the filibuster, deriding it as a bloated federal overreach.
Republicans never seriously considered the legislation, or a narrower alternative proposed in recent days by Mr. Manchin. They mounted an aggressive campaign in congressional committees, on television and finally on the floor to portray the bill as a self-serving federalization of elections to benefit Democrats. They called Democrats’ warnings about democracy hyperbolic. And they defended their state counterparts, including arguments that the laws were needed to address nonexistent “election integrity” issues Mr. Trump raised about the 2020 election.
Senate Republicans particularly savaged provisions restructuring the Federal Election Commission to avoid deadlocks and the proposed creation of a public campaign financing system for congressional campaigns.
“These same rotten proposals have sometimes been called a massive overhaul for a broken democracy, sometimes just a modest package of tweaks for a democracy that’s working perfectly and sometimes a response to state actions, which this bill actually predates by many years,” said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the minority leader. “But whatever label Democrats slap on the bill, the substance remains the same.”
His top deputy, Senator John Thune of South Dakota, also threw cold water on any suggestion the two parties could come together on a narrower voting bill as long as Democrats wanted Congress to overpower the states.
“I don’t think there’s anything I’ve seen yet that doesn’t fundamentally change the way states conduct elections,” he said. “It’s sort of a line in the sand for most of our members.”
At more than 800 pages, the For the People Act was remarkably broad. It was first assembled in 2019 as a compendium of long-sought liberal election changes and campaign pledges that had energized Democrats’ anti-corruption campaign platform in the 2018 midterm elections. At the time, Democrats did not control the Senate or the White House, and so the bill served more as a statement of values than a viable piece of legislation.
When Democrats improbably won control of them, proponents insisted that what had essentially been a messaging bill become a top legislative priority. But the approach was always flawed. Mr. Manchin did not support the legislation, and other Democrats privately expressed concerns over key provisions. State election administrators from both parties said some of its mandates were simply unworkable (Democrats proposed tweaks to alleviate their concerns). Republicans felt little pressure to back a bill of its size and partisan origins.
Democratic leaders won Mr. Manchin’s vote on Tuesday by agreeing to consider a narrower compromise proposal he drafted in case the debate had proceeded. Mr. Manchin’s alternative would have expanded early and mail-in voting, made Election Day a federal holiday, and imposed new campaign and government ethics rules. But it cut out proposals slammed by Republicans, including one that would have neutered state voter identification laws popular with voters and another to set up a public campaign financing system.
Mr. Manchin was not the only Democrat keen on Tuesday to project a sense of optimism and purpose, even as the party’s options dwindled. Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, announced she would use her gavel on the Rules Committee to hold a series of hearings on election issues, including a field hearing in Georgia to highlight the state’s restrictive new voting law.
Vice President Kamala Harris, who asked to take the lead on voting issues for Mr. Biden, spent the afternoon on Capitol Hill trying to drum up support for the bill and craft some areas of bipartisan compromise. She later presided over the vote.
“The fight is not over,” she told reporters afterward.
Facing criticism from party activists who accused him of taking too passive a role on the issue, Mr. Biden said he would have more to say on the issue next week but vowed to fight on against the dawning of a “Jim Crow era in the 21st century.”
“I’ve been engaged in this work my whole career, and we are going to be ramping up our efforts to overcome again — for the people, for our very democracy,” he said in a statement.
But privately, top Democrats in Congress conceded they had few compelling options and dwindling time to act — particularly if they cannot persuade all 50 of their members to scrap the filibuster rule. The Senate will leave later this week for a two-week break. When senators return, Democratic leaders, including Mr. Biden, are eager to quickly shift to consideration of an infrastructure and jobs package that could easily consume the rest of the summer.
They have also been advised by Democratic elections lawyers that unless a voting overhaul is signed into law by Labor Day, it stands little chance of taking effect before the 2022 midterm elections.
Both the House and the Senate are still expected to vote this fall on another marquee voting bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. The bill would put teeth back into a key provision of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that made it harder for jurisdictions with a history of discrimination to enact voting restrictions, which was invalidated by the Supreme Court in 2013. While it does have some modest Republican support, it too appears to be likely doomed by the filibuster.
“This place can always make you despondent,” said Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut. “The whole exercise of being a member of this body is convincing yourself to get up another day to convince yourself that the fight is worth engaging in. But yeah, this certainly feels like an existential fight.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (97%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (94%); POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (91%); VOTERS & VOTING (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); REDISTRICTING (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); LIBERALISM (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); ETHICS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); CONTESTED ELECTIONS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); MISCONDUCT (71%); United States Politics and Government (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Law and Legislation (%); Absentee Voting (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); Voting and Voters (%); Ethics and Official Misconduct (%); Senate (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Harris, Kamala D (%); Klobuchar, Amy (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); McConnell, Mitch (%); Schumer, Charles E (%); Sinema, Kyrsten (%)
 Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (55%)
 Industry: MARKETING & ADVERTISING (71%); MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (71%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (93%); KAMALA HARRIS (92%); KYRSTEN SINEMA (92%); CHARLES SCHUMER (88%); ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); AYANNA PRESSLEY (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE MANCHIN (78%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (73%); MITCH MCCONNELL (73%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Harris, Kamala D; Klobuchar, Amy; Manchin, Joe III; McConnell, Mitch; Schumer, Charles E; Sinema, Kyrsten
 Geographic: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 25, 2021

 

End of Document
Manchin stays away from a lunch at which Texas lawmakers urge Senate Democrats to pass a broad voting rights bill.
The New York Times 
June 15, 2021 Tuesday 16:50 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 600 words
Byline: Jonathan Weisman
Highlight: Senator Joe Manchin III is the only Democrat in the Senate who has refused to sign on to the For the People Act.
Body




Senator Joe Manchin III is the only Democrat in the Senate who has refused to sign on to the For the People Act. 
Tuesday’s Senate Democratic lunch was supposed to be a homecoming of sorts — but  an uncomfortable one for Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia.
He didn’t show up.
For the first time in a year, Senate Democrats — newly freed from pandemic precautions that prevented their weekly lunch for more than a year — convened in the ornate room in the Capitol named after a former majority leader, Mike Mansfield, just off the Senate floor, to hash out the issues facing the caucus. Front and center was the escalating pressure from Democrats nationwide to push forward with a far-reaching congressional voting-rights bill to counter restrictive ballot access laws that are streaming through Republican-held state capitals.
Mr. Manchin, as the only Democrat in the Senate who has refused to sign on to the bill, was supposed to be in the hot seat. His absence suggested that he was sticking by his opposition. 
As part of a series of meetings designed to rally support for the legislation, Senate leaders had brought in Democratic members of the Texas Legislature to make the case for why the bill, known as the For the People Act, is urgently needed. The Texans managed to stave off passage of a state voter restriction bill last month with a dramatic late-night walkout, but that stunt cannot stave off the bill’s eventual passage if the Republican majority in Austin remains united. Many Democrats argue that only the enactment of superseding federal legislation mandating extended voting hours and mail-in balloting, as the party’s bill would do, could accomplish that.
Texas Democrats pleaded for the federal cavalry to ride in.
“We heard really moving testimony from five Texas state lawmakers about the vicious, nasty and bigoted attacks aimed at voting rights in their state,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, said afterward. “These Texas Democrats bravely fought against voter suppression. They briefed our senators on what’s happening in their state and why passing legislation is so important.”
The Texans were largely preaching to the converted. Forty-nine Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents have signed on as co-sponsors of the measure, also known as S1. The bill, which also covers presidential ethics and campaign finance, is slated to face a test vote in the Senate later this month.
The 50th vote is the problem; Mr. Manchin has said in no uncertain terms that he will not vote for the bill, nor will he vote to end the legislative filibuster in the Senate, an equally necessary step, since Democrats have no hope of getting enough Republican support to come up with the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster.
Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, said no senator from his party would vote for what they see as a power grab by Democrats to seize control of election laws from the states. 
“The core desire they have is to federalize all elections, to try to achieve a benefit for the Democrats, at the expense of the Republicans,” he said.
Some senators on the Democratic side have expressed qualms at the bill’s scope. Senator Angus King of Maine, an independent who caucuses with Democrats, said he had issues with the breadth of the bill, and would favor jettisoning some parts of it, especially a provision that would begin taxpayer financing of elections. 
But Democrats say first things first, and the first step is to try to get Mr. Manchin to co-sponsor the bill and present at least the veneer of a united Democratic front.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); ELECTION LAW (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); CAUCUSES (79%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (79%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (79%); ETHICS (78%); BALLOTS (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (73%); MAIL-IN VOTING (71%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (71%); Manchin, Joe III (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Democratic Party (%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (92%); CHARLES SCHUMER (59%); MITCH MCCONNELL (59%); Manchin, Joe III
 Geographic: AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (94%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: July 12, 2021

 

End of Document
Why Democrats Are Reluctantly Making Voter ID Laws a Bargaining Chip
The New York Times 
June 23, 2021 Wednesday 10:17 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1773 words
Byline: Jonathan Weisman and Nick Corasaniti
Highlight: While party leaders have long worried about the discriminatory effects of such laws, many now see other restrictive voting measures pushed by Republicans as a more urgent threat.
Body




While party leaders have long worried about the discriminatory effects of such laws, many now see other restrictive voting measures pushed by Republicans as a more urgent threat.
WASHINGTON — Congressional Democrats, searching for any way forward on legislation to protect voting rights, find themselves softening their once-firm opposition to a form of restriction on the franchise that they had long warned would be Exhibit A for voter suppression: voter identification laws.
Any path to passing the far-reaching Democratic elections legislation that Republicans blocked with a filibuster on Tuesday will almost certainly have to include a compromise on the bill’s near-blanket ban on state laws that require voters to present photo identification before they can cast a ballot. As such laws were first cropping up decades ago, Democrats fought them tooth and nail, insisting that they would be an impossible barrier to scale for the nation’s most vulnerable voters, especially older people and people of color.
But in recent years, as the concept of voter identification has become broadly popular, the idea that voters bring some form of ID to the polls has been accepted by Democrats ranging from Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia on the center-right to Stacey Abrams of Georgia, a hero of the left.
“As I have always said, a person should have to confirm that they are who they are in order to vote,” Senator Raphael Warnock, a Democrat from Georgia and a key ally of Ms. Abrams, said in an interview. “What I get concerned about is when you say gun licenses are OK, when a student ID is not. Then I think any reasonable person has to ask, ‘Well, what’s that game?’”
And compared with newer state laws that restrict early voting and mail-in voting, limit ballot drop boxes and allow partisan elected officials to take on a greater role overseeing elections, voter identification suddenly seems like an expendable bargaining chip for some Democrats.
“I have been fighting voter ID since 1990 when I was in the State Legislature,” said Representative Gwen Moore, a Black Democrat from Wisconsin, where Republicans adopted an ID law a decade ago that Democrats said would devastate universal access to the ballot box. “I don’t know that it’s less important, but given the gravity of all the other things that they want to do, like shutting down polling sites, in the hierarchy of needs, I really believe we give them their old No. 1 thing.” Then, she said, Democrats need to demand that other impediments to the ballot box be struck down.
While the idea of voter identification requirements remains popular in national polling, the implementation of such laws throughout history has at times been discriminatory and even weaponized to target and suppress votes in certain communities. Numerous federal court rulings in the past decade alone have struck down voter ID laws in Georgia, Texas and North Carolina as discriminatory.
In recent years, voter ID laws have been adopted in varying degrees of strictness from Washington State to Florida, with the strictest measures enacted in the Southeast and Wisconsin. Republican-led legislatures are now pushing ahead with new bills to toughen identification rules for absentee and mail-in ballots.
And this year, at least 101 bills with restrictive voter ID provisions have been introduced in 35 states, according to data from the Voting Rights Lab, a liberal-leaning voting rights group. Georgia, Florida, Montana, Iowa, Wyoming and Arkansas have already passed new voter identification laws.
In the fight over the far-reaching Democratic legislation known as the For the People Act, Republicans seized on shifts in national attitudes toward basic requirements for identification to declare the entire measure unpopular in large part because of its voter ID provision. Democrats, plotting a second act for the bill, are looking to neutralize that argument.
“We are looking for a middle ground,” said Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota and the chairwoman of the Senate Rules Committee, which is responsible for finding a way forward after a motion just to take up the broader bill failed on a 50-to-50 vote on Tuesday, 10 votes short of the number needed to break a filibuster.
The For the People Act would set minimum standards for early and mail-in voting, roll back voting restrictions that Republican state legislatures have enacted in the wake of G.O.P. losses in 2020, extend taxpayer financing to congressional campaigns, end gerrymandering of House districts, and apply new standards of ethics to the president and vice president.
While Democrats say the measure represents nothing short of salvation for American democracy, Republicans have called it a breathtaking effort to grab control of election administration from the states. Even as the federal bill is bottled up, Republicans in state legislatures have pushed nearly 400 new bills and laws that would usher in a host of new voting restrictions, with at least 24 of those bills already signed into law.
To counter the claims of overreach, Mr. Manchin produced a compromise that would jettison the public financing of elections — denounced by Republicans as “welfare for politicians” — and revise the voter identification provisions in the bill.
Under Mr. Manchin’s version, states would be allowed to require photo identification, but they would have to define ID broadly — to include student IDs, hunting licenses, conceal-carry gun permits, and any form of government paper that includes the voter’s name, like a utility bill.
If voters cannot provide such ID, they could cast a provisional ballot, subject to signature verification against their voter registration card. Even if the signature cannot be verified, the voter would be given 10 days to return to a voting administrator with a valid ID.
Some Black lawmakers — whom Democratic leaders have looked to for advice on the voting bill — have examined the Manchin proposal and have generally blessed it. Representative Joe Neguse, Democrat of Colorado, said Wednesday that coming to a compromise on individual provisions like the voter ID section was important, but that ultimately, none of it would pass without changes to the Senate’s legislative filibuster.
“For me, the larger debate that is probably more critical is reforming the filibuster,” he said.
Senator Angus King, an independent from Maine, said Wednesday that the next step would be nailing down a compromise that Mr. Manchin will accept, then looking for Republican support. Ms. Klobuchar promised to take her committee on the road next week, when the Senate begins a two-week recess, to try to add political pressure.
And many voting rights and civil rights groups, which have been stalwart supporters of the bill in its entirety, are signaling flexibility on voter ID, reiterating their previous support for such measures within the right confines.
“Basic voter ID has been a part of voting since the beginning, and both Democrats and Republicans agree that people should provide proof of who they are before casting ballots,” Ms. Abrams, the former Democratic candidate for governor in Georgia, wrote in her book “Our Time Is Now” last year. “What has changed in recent years is the type of identification required and the difficulty or expense of securing the necessary documents.” She made similar comments last week on CNN.
Election officials have echoed her arguments, saying that any new identification requirements set in a federal voting law should come with dedicated sources of funding to help states provide outreach to voters who may be affected.
“You’ll find the vast majority of us on both sides of the aisle recognize the importance of identifying voters as a security requirement for the process,” said Jocelyn Benson, the Michigan secretary of state and a Democrat. “We also want to make sure that no one is unnecessarily blocked from voting.”
Recently, numerous court cases have found that Republican-enacted voter identification laws had a disproportionate impact on poorer communities and communities of color, particularly among Black and Latino voters, as well as younger voters, and that some were created with the specific intention of affecting those communities.
In 2013, North Carolina passed a sweeping voter ID law that required voters to present government-issued photo identification. After a yearslong legal battle, a federal appeals court knocked down the law in 2016, saying “the new provisions target African Americans with almost surgical precision” and “impose cures for problems that did not exist.”
“Before enacting that law, the legislature requested data on the use, by race, of a number of voting practices,” the court wrote. “Upon receipt of the race data, the General Assembly enacted legislation that restricted voting and registration in five different ways, all of which disproportionately affected African Americans.”
In 2014, Texas faced a similar rebuke from a federal court. Judge Nelva Gonzales Ramos ruled against a state law that provided a limited number of acceptable IDs to vote. Studies estimated that more than 600,000 voters lacked sufficient ID under the new law.
In her ruling, Judge Ramos wrote that the law “was imposed with an unconstitutional discriminatory purpose” and “constitutes an unconstitutional poll tax.”
Because the ruling was delivered near that year’s elections, the Supreme Court held that Texas could conduct them with the law in place. The Brennan Center for Justice, a research institute, followed multiple voters who were denied the right to vote under the law.
Ms. Moore said she believed Donald J. Trump narrowly won Wisconsin in 2016 because Democrats had been thrown on their heels by the state’s voter ID law. Intense organizing, she said, helped spread awareness before President Biden’s victory in the state last year.
But, she said, “we still barely won by the hair of our chinny chin chin in Wisconsin. That point shaving really mattered.”
Recent studies have shown that new laws passed this year that restrict voting through identification requirements will have a disproportionate impact on communities of color.
According to an investigation by The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, more than 272,000 Georgians lack the identification requirements set forth in the state’s sprawling new voting law. More than 55 percent of those 272,000 people are Black, while Black voters make up only about a third of the voting-age population in Georgia.
PHOTO: An election inspector last year in Wisconsin, where some of the strictest voter ID requirements have recently been put in place. 

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (92%); ELECTION LAW (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); POLITICS (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (89%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); BALLOTS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MAIL-IN VOTING (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (77%); ELECTION MONITORING (73%); GUN CONTROL (73%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (71%); HISTORY (68%); SENIOR CITIZENS (68%); Democratic Party (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Senate (%); Black People (%); Discrimination (%); Absentee Voting (%); Law and Legislation (%); States (US) (%); Polls and Public Opinion (%); State Legislatures (%); Identification Devices (%); Hispanic-Americans (%); Republican Party (%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); RAPHAEL WARNOCK (79%); GWEN MOORE (58%); JOE MANCHIN (57%)
 Geographic: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: July 1, 2021

 

End of Document
Manchin vows to block Democratic voting rights bill and preserve the filibuster.
The New York Times 
June 7, 2021 Monday 09:00 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 550 words
Byline: Jonathan Weisman
Highlight: Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, appeared to slam the door on the far-reaching measure when he wrote that he would not vote for any partisan voting bill.
Body




Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia said on Sunday in no uncertain terms that he would not vote for the Democrats’ far-reaching bill to combat voter suppression, nor would he ever end the legislative filibuster, a written promise that imperils much of President Biden’s agenda.
The bill, which all the other Senate Democrats had rallied around as a moonshot bid to preserve American democracy, would roll back dozens of laws being passed by Republican state legislatures to limit early and mail-in voting and empower partisan poll watchers. The measure, known as the For the People Act, would also restore many of the ethical controls on the presidency that Donald J. Trump shattered.
In The Charleston Gazette-Mail, the newspaper of the capital of his home state, Mr. Manchin, a Democrat, wrote: “I believe that partisan voting legislation will destroy the already weakening binds of our democracy, and for that reason, I will vote against the For the People Act. Furthermore, I will not vote to weaken or eliminate the filibuster.”
The 818-page bill would end partisan gerrymandering, tighten controls on campaign spending and ease voter registration. It would also force major-party candidates for president and vice president to release 10 years’ worth of personal and business tax returns and end the president’s and vice president’s exemption from conflict-of-interest rules, which allowed Mr. Trump to maintain businesses that profited off his presidency.
With Mr. Manchin’s vow, passage of the full For the People Act appears to be impossible, though parts of it could pass in other ways if Democrats are willing to break up the bill, a move that they have resisted. Mr. Manchin’s blockade of filibuster changes makes other Biden initiatives far less likely to pass, including any overhaul of immigration laws, a permanent expansion of the Affordable Care Act, controls of the price of prescription drugs and the most serious efforts to tackle climate change.
Mr. Manchin said instead that he would support passage of another bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, which would restore federal oversight over state-level voting law changes to protect minority groups that might be targeted. He cited one Republican, Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, as a supporter of the measure, which would give the Justice Department powers to police voting rights that the Supreme Court took away in 2013.
That decision freed nine states, mainly in the South, to change voting laws without pre-approval from Washington. After the 2020 election, many of those states — and several others — jumped at the chance, powered by the false claim that voting in November was rife with fraud.
But Mr. Manchin is still far short of the 60-vote threshold he backs to pass even that bill.
“I continue to engage with my Republican and Democratic colleagues about the value of the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act,” he wrote, “and I am encouraged by the desire from both sides to transcend partisan politics and strengthen our democracy by protecting voting rights.”
PHOTO: “I believe that partisan voting legislation will destroy the already weakening binds of our democracy,” Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia wrote.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (93%); VOTERS & VOTING (92%); PARTISANSHIP (91%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (90%); ELECTION REFORM (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (79%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (79%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); ETHICS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MAIL-IN VOTING (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); IMMIGRATION LAW (71%); TAXES & TAXATION (70%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (64%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (60%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); SUPREME COURTS (60%); DRUG PRICES (50%); IMMIGRATION (50%)
 Industry: DRUG PRICES (50%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (50%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (90%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); LISA MURKOWSKI (59%); JOHN LEWIS (58%)
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 7, 2021

 

End of Document
What Lordstown’s Meltdown Means for SPACs; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 15, 2021 Tuesday 08:40 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1930 words
Byline: Andrew Ross Sorkin, Jason Karaian, Sarah Kessler, Michael J. de la Merced, Lauren Hirsch and Ephrat Livni
Highlight: Could regulators have stopped the electric car start-up’s implosion?
Body




Could regulators have stopped the electric car start-up’s implosion?
Could the S.E.C. have stopped the Lordstown implosion?
Lordstown Motors’ founder and C.E.O., Steve Burns, as well its C.F.O., Julio Rodriguez, abruptly resigned yesterday. The departures came as the electric vehicle manufacturer, which went public via a SPAC last year, said a board investigation had found “issues with the accuracy” of claims about orders for its yet-to-be-released electric truck. Shares of Lordstown fell sharply.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is looking into SPAC regulations, but last week said the review wasn’t due until April 2022. In the meantime, what, if anything, can be done to stop this from happening again?
SPACs allow companies to go public earlier than traditional I.P.O.s, in large part because they can rely on projections to tell a story they probably couldn’t by strictly relying on past numbers. (Such projections are not allowed in I.P.O.s.) That can be good for a biotech firm that needs capital for promising research, for example. But it can be dangerous for investors, by allowing start-up execs to spin stories about the demand for, say, electric flying taxis, even if the chance that those vehicles will be widely available is remote.
SPACs are structured such that sponsors are incentivized to get a deal done quickly, even if the company they’re buying may not be ready for public market scrutiny. With electric-vehicle SPAC deals alone, we’ve seen Trevor Milton step down as chairman of Nikola and Ulrich Kranz step down as C.E.O. of Canoo. Both companies have been unable to live up to their rosy projections and, like Lordstown, attracted S.E.C. investigations.
“You’re going to see more of this, frankly,” Tony Aquila, Canoo’s new C.E.O., told DealBook. “That’s the power of the SPAC right?” he said. “You can get to the public markets sooner — but that means you have to grow up in front of the public.”
The S.E.C. could have helped with some of the issues at play here. The commission has said it’s looking at how SPACs treat their projections. If projections weren’t allowed, or if rules forced executives to make more judicious promises, perhaps a company like Lordstown would not have made it into the public market so soon via a SPAC.
But SPACs aren’t the whole problem. Lordstown had disclosed that its pre-orders were nonbinding in its SPAC merger proxy. The S.E.C. didn’t question those orders in an inquiry into Lordstown’s disclosures at the time of its SPAC deal. Would it have been different if the company went public in a traditional I.P.O.? “There are a lot of gray areas with the way I.P.O.s and public companies report orders,” Jay Ritter of the University of Florida, an I.P.O. expert, told DealBook. The order quality issue at Lordstown “is not something that typically gets caught by auditors or in the I.P.O. process,” he said.
HERE’S WHAT’S HAPPENING 
The U.S. and the E.U. reach a truce on airplane subsidies. The two sides will end a 17-year dispute over government support to Boeing and Airbus, a fight that led to a $12 billion tariff battle. As part of the deal, the two companies will develop future aircraft without subsidies.
Expectations for inflation rise. Consumers expect higher and faster inflation over the next several years, a new survey found, a potentially important signal as Fed officials meet this week to set policy. The hedge fund mogul Paul Tudor Jones recommended going “all in on the inflation trades” if the Fed stays its dovish course.
Investors bet that green energy’s rise will lead to higher oil prices. Some traders and analysts think that greater demand for cleaner energy will lead to less oil drilling, depressing supply and pushing up prices, The Wall Street Journal reports. Crude oil hit its highest level in over two years yesterday.
England postpones its “Freedom Day” as a new coronavirus variant spreads. Prime Minister Boris Johnson delayed the end of pandemic restrictions by four weeks. (Good news: Vaccines appear to protect against the variant, Delta, that is spreading in the country.)
Goldman Sachs plans to relocate traders to Florida. The Wall Street titan is in the early stages of moving more than 100 people — including veteran executives — to a new office in West Palm Beach, Insider reports. As with other financiers flocking to the Sunshine State, Goldman executives are drawn to lower taxes and warmer weather.
PwC gets into the trust-building business
This morning, PwC announced a series of investments and a major shift in strategy. The most eye-catching move is the professional services giant’s ambition to profit from teaching corporate executives how to be more trustworthy, DealBook’s Michael de la Merced writes for The Times.
PwC’s U.S. arm is founding the Trust Leadership Institute as part of a $300 million initiative to focus its business around the concept of “trust.” It is meant to teach clients how to handle issues such as transparency, ethics, data security, corporate governance, and politics and policy — without prescribing specific solutions. “Trust will define the next 10 years,” much as technology defined the past decade, Tim Ryan, PwC’s U.S. chairman and senior partner, told Michael.
•	PwC’s U.S. arm also plans to commit $125 million to give 25,000 Black and Latino college students career coaching and mentoring, with a goal of hiring up to 10,000 of them at the firm itself.
•	On a global basis, PwC will combine its accounting and tax services into a new division called — what else? — “trust solutions.”
It’s capitalizing on corporate America’s push to focus on more than profits. Ryan noted that the firm’s clients are increasingly open about feeling pressure to speak out on issues like the environment and social justice. Since many business leaders learn softer skills on the job, it leaves them in need of help to make decisions in a way that maximizes trust.
•	Professional services firms have some experience with the need to rebuild trust, given their legal run-ins over issues like international tax shelters and the mixing of auditing and consulting services.
“If you can go into a restaurant in New York City, you can come into the office.”
— James Gorman, Morgan Stanley’s C.E.O., on his firm’s preference that employees return to the office by Labor Day. More broadly, Wall Street is grappling with remote work: Most Goldman Sachs employees in New York City were required to return to the office yesterday, while Citigroup is leaning toward a hybrid model.
Exclusive: Mexican fintech Credijusto is buying a bank
Credijusto, the Mexico-based fintech company, is acquiring the domestic bank Banco Finterra. The deal, which will create a company with a combined asset base of about $300 million, is the first time a Mexican fintech has acquired a bank in the country.
Buying a bank can be quicker than obtaining a fresh bank license, allowing a fintech to tap the lower cost of capital that banks enjoy. Similar deals elsewhere include LendingClub’s acquisition of Radius Bank last yearand SoFi’s takeover of Golden Pacific Bancorp this year. John Mack, the former Morgan Stanley chief who invested in Credijusto, said that his advice in buying a bank was twofold: Be “pristine with regulations,” and impose “real discipline.”
Credijusto has the U.S. in its sights. The 2020 North America trade deal, combined with geopolitical tensions with China, has bolstered trade ties between the U.S. and Mexico. Credijusto, which caters to small businesses, is looking to take advantage with a new service financing invoices for the sale of Mexican products to U.S. buyers.
•	The company may also open operations in the U.S. — initially as a non-bank player — and would consider buying a bank in the country, said David Poritz, one of Credijusto’s chief executives.
Investing in political influence pays
The battle over ballot access is heating up this week as Texas Democrats who blocked a restrictive voting law meet with federal lawmakers in Washington to talk politics, money and law. Specifically, they are there to discuss the For the People Act, sweeping federal legislation that would expand voting rights nationwide and change campaign finance laws to reduce the influence of money in politics.
Most small-business owners support expanding voting access and restricting political spending, according to a new survey by the trade group Small Businesses for America’s Future. The poll, shared first with DealBook, was conducted in April and May after hundreds of mostly big business leaders signed statements opposing voting restrictions. Three-quarters of respondents to the survey supported expanding voting access. Notably, 86 percent also said political spending should be restricted. Big donors and recipients may beg to differ.
Every dollar spent on political influence yields a $20 return in future earnings, according to a new study of lobbying, PAC and trade group spending at more than 2,750 companies. This return is much higher than money spent on R&amp;D or advertising, the study found. “No one has any interest in getting this out,” said Shivaram Rajgopal of Columbia Business School, one of the study’s authors. He said he believed that more disclosure would help everyone better understand how companies and politicians operate.
•	Case in point? The corporate money flowing to Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia — a centrist Democrat who is key to clinching a majority in the Senate — is under scrutiny after he voiced opposition to the For the People Act.
PAC donations are crucial for the Republican lawmakers who opposed certifying the presidential election results. A new analysis by the Leadership Now Project, which DealBook is first to report, examined 2020 campaign donations for 145 of the objectors and found that more than half received a quarter of their funding from corporate PACs. “If there’s one message to take away,” said Daniella Ballou-Aares, Leadership Now’s C.E.O., “it’s that business giving is one of the most powerful levers when it comes to safeguarding our democracy.”
THE SPEED READ 
Deals
•	Pandemic borrowing has left U.S. nonfinancial companies with $11.2 trillion in debt — nearly half the size of the American economy. (WSJ)
•	Dan Loeb’s Third Point has amassed a stake in Vivendi as the French media company prepares to spin out Universal Music Group, in part to fellow hedge fund mogul Bill Ackman. (Bloomberg)
Politics and policy
•	Which states are eliminating pandemic unemployment benefits, and when. (NYT)
•	Two Republican senators introduced a bill that would ban most mergers that give a company a market share above 66 percent. (CNBC)
Tech
•	A major investigation into conditions for workers at an Amazon fulfillment center in New York during the pandemic. (NYT)
•	Here are the Didi Chuxing executives who could become billionaires after the I.P.O. of the Chinese ride-hailing giant. (Bloomberg)
•	Britain is the latest country to probe the power that Apple and Google exert over their app stores. (Competition and Markets Authority)
Best of the rest
•	The push for companies to take stands on social issues is putting pressure on their lawyers. (FT)
•	Surveys show that up to 40 percent of workers are considering quitting, either to find a new postpandemic career or to seek an employer with better remote-work policies. (Axios)
•	Country-hopping remote work could saddle workers with headache-inducing tax issues. 

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: ELECTRIC VEHICLES (93%); ELECTRIC VEHICLE INDUSTRY (92%); SECURITIES LAW (90%); INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); RESIGNATIONS (89%); COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (78%); ELECTRIC MOBILITY (78%); MERGERS (78%); MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); US SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION INVESTIGATIONS (78%); EXECUTIVE MOVES (77%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (76%); BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%); CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (73%); DIVESTITURES (73%); ELECTRIC AIRCRAFT (73%); PUBLIC COMPANIES (73%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (73%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (72%); Mergers, Acquisitions and Divestitures (%); Corporate Social Responsibility (%); Campaign Finance (%); Canoo Inc (%); PricewaterhouseCoopers (%); Lordstown Motors Corp (%)
 Organization: SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION (90%)
 Industry: ELECTRIC VEHICLES (93%); ELECTRIC VEHICLE INDUSTRY (92%); MOTOR VEHICLES (90%); SECURITIES LAW (90%); INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS (89%); ELECTRIC MOBILITY (78%); MANUFACTURING (78%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (78%); US SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (76%); BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%); ELECTRIC AIRCRAFT (73%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (50%)
 Load-Date: June 15, 2021

 

End of Document
Do Democrats Have a Realistic Path Forward on Their Voting Bills?; On Politics
The New York Times 
May 11, 2021 Tuesday 18:45 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1286 words
Byline: Giovanni Russonello
Highlight: As Republicans across the country restrict voting and federal legislation stalls in Congress, the left’s eyes are on Joe Manchin.
Body




As Republicans across the country restrict voting and federal legislation stalls in Congress, the left’s eyes are on Joe Manchin.
The Senate on Tuesday took up the For the People Act, a sweeping bill to overhaul the country’s election system, the first step in what will probably be a long and winding legislative process. Democrats are faced with not only the all-out resistance of Republicans, but also the hesitation of their own 50th vote, Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, the lone Democrat in the chamber who hasn’t signed on as a sponsor of the bill.
The elections package, which was the subject of a combative back-and-forth in the Senate Rules Committee on Tuesday, is more than a voting rights bill. You can think of it as a legislative Leviathan, designed by Democrats to attack what they see as a wide range of flaws in the country’s electoral politics in a single swoop.
But their inability to unify their own caucus around the bill — let alone to map out a path to the finish line in the face of unified Republican opposition — appears to be setting up a showdown within the party, posing a crucial test of Mr. Manchin’s so-far granite commitment to keeping the filibuster in place.
For President Biden and his party, the bill risks becoming one of the greatest disappointments of their time in power. It could be a forever what-if as Democrats strain to prevent Republicans from deepening their structural advantages up and down the country’s political system, in part by limiting who has access to the ballot.
The For the People Act contains provisions to protect voting rights, rein in big money’s role in politics, strengthen enforcement of existing election laws and limit gerrymandering. Democratic leaders have said that the bill is essential to protecting the future of democracy — particularly at a moment when Republican-led state legislatures are passing voting restrictions at a higher rate than any moment since the Jim Crow era.
At nearly 900 pages, the legislation’s enormousness may be both its greatest asset and a source of vulnerability.
“Because it’s tackling these several priorities at the same time, it has a much broader base of support from many different communities of stakeholders,” said Wendy Weiser, vice president for democracy at the Brennan Center for Justice. “I’d say that politically, the fact that it addresses more than one crisis is a strength.”
But the bill’s size leaves a lot of exposed surface area for opponents to attack, and the proceedings in the Senate on Tuesday pointed to a hard road ahead. Republican senators spent the afternoon tossing darts at the bill in the form of amendments and attacking it as a sign of Democratic overreach.
“The Democratic Party, on its own, wants to rewrite the ground rules of American politics for their benefit,” Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, said on the floor, arguing flatly that “our democracy is not in crisis.”
Mr. Manchin has expressed worries that passing an election bill along partisan lines would feed into that Republican narrative. But the bill’s supporters insist that he will ultimately have to let that go and ease his opposition to removing the filibuster, a Senate procedural tactic that has often stymied major legislation.
Norman Ornstein, an emeritus scholar at the American Enterprise Institute who has been an outspoken proponent of overhauling the filibuster, said that proceedings like Tuesday’s would “demonstrate to Joe Manchin that his desire to follow the regular order, to have a bill go through committee hearings with an open amendment process, is not going to result in a serious effort by Republicans to reach any bipartisan agreement.”
By the end of Tuesday afternoon, Republicans on the rules committee had offered up scores of amendments.
“There isn’t a whole lot of evidence that these amendments are a serious attempt to improve the bill,” Ms. Weiser said. “They’re not necessarily being offered in good faith.”
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, has said that August is his probable deadline for moving the bill to a final vote — a timeline that would allow it, if passed, to take effect before the 2022 midterm elections.
But to pass election-related legislation, Democrats would need at least 60 votes, because the bill isn’t likely to qualify for budgetary reconciliation — or they would have to roll back the filibuster, which Mr. Manchin and other moderate Democratic senators remain unwilling to do.
Mr. Manchin has pushed his party’s leadership to focus on the John Lewis Voting Rights Act. That is a far narrower bill that would restore key parts of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that were struck down by the Supreme Court’s conservative majority in 2013.
But that bill would not address other aspects of what many advocates — and voters on both sides of the aisle — call a broken democratic system: campaign finance, gerrymandering and the Federal Election Commission’s ability to enforce anti-corruption and transparency laws. And even on the voting rights front, it would apply only to state-level laws passed after the John Lewis bill itself was adopted.
Fred Wertheimer, a longtime proponent of campaign-finance regulation and the founder of the advocacy group Democracy 21, said that while both bills had typically been discussed in the context of voting rights, Americans would also respond to an emphasis on the provisions in the For the People Act that take aim at money in politics and gerrymandering.
“We know that the public believes that the Washington system is rigged — and rigged against them,” Mr. Wertheimer said in an interview. “I think this will attack the problems that they perceive exist in Washington.”
“Interestingly enough, the support for this in public opinion polls is bipartisan,” he added. “The unanimous Republican opposition to this legislation exists only in the halls of Congress.”
Public opinion aside, congressional Republicans’ united resistance is what matters in the coming weeks. And that leaves Mr. Manchin firmly in the Washington spotlight.
At an event in West Virginia last week, he emphasized the need for democracy legislation and said that he was working with Representative James E. Clyburn and Senator Raphael Warnock, both Democrats, on voting legislation.
“It should not be made difficult,” Mr. Manchin said of voting. “That’s not who we are as a country. It’s not who we are as democracy. And democracy will not survive unless you have an open and fair” elections system.
Trevor Potter, a former chairman of the Federal Election Commission who now runs the Campaign Legal Center, has been promoting the bill in private meetings with lawmakers. He said that he saw no indication yet that Mr. Manchin was ready to soften his commitment to keeping the filibuster in its present form.
But the picture could change after Democrats turn to Mr. Biden’s major infrastructure proposal, an area where they have a greater chance of finding some Republican support. “I think that process, if it occurs on those bills, will be helpful on the conversations to come,” Mr. Potter said.
“Until that plays out, it’s hard to know where he’s going to end up,” he added of Mr. Manchin.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); DEMOCRACIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CAUCUSES (78%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); Democratic Party (%); Voting and Voters (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Republican Party (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Manchin, Joe III (%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); JOE MANCHIN (90%); MITCH MCCONNELL (58%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Manchin, Joe III
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: May 11, 2021

 

End of Document
Maybe Joe Manchin Knows Exactly What He’s Doing; Ezra Klein
The New York Times 
June 17, 2021 Thursday 00:04 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1345 words
Byline: Ezra Klein
Highlight: In his own way, the Democratic senator from West Virginia is a political magician. What does he have up his sleeve now?
Body




Let me start with something you don’t often hear from liberals these days: A few words of praise for Joe Manchin.
By the standards of the age, Manchin is a political magician. West Virginia, the state he represents as a Democrat in the Senate, has a 35.5-point lean toward the Republican Party, according to FiveThirtyEight. To put that into context, there is only one Republican in the Senate representing a state that’s even mildly bluish, and that’s Susan Collins, from Maine, which has a four-point Democratic bias.
Put simply, Manchin shouldn’t exist. And Democrats cannot take him for granted. Their Senate majority, and thus the whole of their legislative agenda, hinges on his ability to win elections anyone else would lose. None of that makes Manchin’s every decision laudable, or even wise, but it demands recognition. He has honed instincts worth respecting. And now, in the 50-50 Senate that teeters on his vote, he is the most powerful legislator of our age.
The question obsessing Washington, then, is simple: What does Manchin want? And Manchin, in statement after statement, has offered a clear answer: bipartisanship.
This is the core of Manchinism. All of the stances he takes that frustrate Democrats right now — his defense of the filibuster, his opposition to the For the People Act, his insistence on endless negotiations with Republicans on infrastructure — run downstream of his belief in bipartisanship. “The time has come to end these political games, and to usher a new era of bipartisanship where we find common ground on the major policy debates facing our nation,” he wrotein The Washington Post. This is maddening to his colleagues who want to judge legislation on the merits. But Manchin has been clear about his goal.
What has not been clear is his strategy. At his worst, Manchin prizes the aesthetic of bipartisanship over its actual pursuit. In those moments, he becomes a defender of the status quo and, paradoxically, an enabler of Republican partisanship. But over the past 24 hours, a plausible path has emerged through which Manchin could build a more cooperative and deliberative Senate. It’s narrow, but it’s there.
Part of the strategy relies on changing the rules. Manchin has said, over and over again, that he will not eliminate or weaken the filibuster. I wish he’d reconsider, but he won’t. The possibility remains, however, that he will strengthen the filibuster.
Historically, the filibuster was a way for committed groups of senators to force debate, for as long as they wanted, on issues of unusual importance to them. Modern filibusters betray that legacy. They do not require debate, they do not require the intense physical commitment of the minority and they do not encourage the long, dramatic deliberations that focus the American public on issues of consequence.
It’s possible to imagine a set of reforms that would restore something more like the filibuster of yore and rebuild the deliberative capacities of the Senate. This would begin with a variation on the congressional scholar Norm Ornstein’s idea toshift the burden of the filibuster: Instead of demanding 60 votes to end debate, require 40 (or 41) to continue it.
That would return the filibuster to something more like we imagine it to be: Impassioned minorities could hold the floor with theatrical speeches, shining public attention on their arguments, but the majority could end debate if the minority relented. To sustain this kind of filibuster would be grueling, which is as it should be. The filibuster is an extraordinary measure, and it should require extraordinary commitment to deploy.
The majority, for its part, would have to carefully weigh the consequences of proceeding with partisan legislation: They would gamble weeks or months of Senate time if they chose to face down a filibuster, with no guarantee of passage on the other end. A reform like this would demand more from both the majority and the minority and ignite the kinds of lengthy, public debates that the Senate was once known for.
In leaked audio published by The Intercept on Wednesday, Manchin appeared to favor exactly this kind of change. “I think, basically, it should be 41 people have to force the issue versus the 60 that we need in the affirmative,” he said.
In addition to changing the rules, Manchin could embrace his role as a broker of legislative compromise. His leverage is immense, and he could use it to force Republicans as well as Democrats to the table. But on voting rights, at least, Manchin hasn’t been wielding his power symmetrically.
“The truth, I would argue, is that voting and election reform that is done in a partisan manner will all but ensure partisan divisions continue to deepen,” Manchin wrote in The Charleston Gazette-Mail this month.
In suggesting that he would oppose any voting reform that was not bipartisan, Manchin offered Republicans a veto over the legislation rather than a choice between partisan and bipartisan bills. He was not asking of them what he was asking of his colleagues, or even of himself.
But on Wednesday, news broke that Manchin’s position was shifting. He is circulating a compromise voting rights memothat he believes could serve as the basis for a bipartisan bill. It eliminates much of what Democrats wanted, like the more ambitious campaign finance reforms, but it bans partisan gerrymandering, restores key provisions of the Voting Rights Act, makes Election Day a public holiday and puts in place automatic voter registration. It also includes some Republican priorities, like mandating that voters show certain forms of identification.
But the question Manchin faces isn’t whether there’s a voting rights bill he can support. It’s whether he’s willing to force Republicans to accept it. As the hinge vote, Manchin could offer both sides a choice: a bipartisan bill designed by Manchin (and whatever allies he chooses) or the outcome on voting rights they fear most — for Democrats, that would be nothing, and for Republicans, that would be everything.
If Democrats refuse to support his bill or offer something reasonable in return, Manchin could join with Republicans to kill it. If Republicans refuse to support it or offer something reasonable in return, he could join with Democrats to pass the original For the People Act, or something more like it.
Core to this strategy is Manchin admitting something he often pretends not to see: It is not in the Republican Party’s interest to cooperate with Democrats on major legislation. Republicans would prefer to pass nothing and watch Joe Biden’s presidency fail. This is not my supposition or slander. This is their own testimony.
“Mitch McConnell’s come under a lot of criticism for saying at one point he wanted to make sure that Barack Obama was a one-term president,” Senator John Barrasso, a member of the Republicans’ Senate leadership team, said. “I want to make Joe Biden a one-half-term president.”
Just as Manchin believes he needs to force Democrats to agree to compromise bills, so too does he need to force Republicans to agree to those bills. Bipartisanship needs to go both ways. If Manchin allows Republicans to kill any bill they do not choose to support, he will be strengthening their incentives for partisanship.
I said, at the top of this column, that Manchin is a political magician. So far he’s mostly been an escape artist, wriggling free of the partisan gravity that governs almost all other Senate elections. But if he could turn the filibuster into a rule that actually encouraged debate and deliberation and pass a bill that made automatic voter registration and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act the law of the land (and partisan gerrymandering a thing of the past), that would truly be his greatest trick.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); HOLDING COMPANIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (77%); United States Politics and Government (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Law and Legislation (%); Democratic Party (%); Senate (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Voting and Voters (%)
 Company:  GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (53%)
 Ticker: GHC (NYSE) (53%)
 Industry: NAICS517311 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (53%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (53%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (53%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (53%); PERIODICAL PUBLISHING (90%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (77%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (77%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS (72%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS (72%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (72%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (93%); Manchin, Joe III
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: June 18, 2021

 

End of Document
Push in Texas By Democrats To Register 1 Million Voters
The New York Times
June 9, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 748 words
Byline: By Nick Corasaniti
Body




With Republicans moving to pass new voting restrictions in the state, Democrats are starting a major statewide registration program focused on racially diverse communities.
The Texas Democratic Party and a coalition of allied progressive groups announced a major voter registration program on Tuesday, pledging to focus on registration in racially diverse communities at a time when the Republican-controlled Texas Legislature is vowing to pass a host of new voting restrictions, many of which would disproportionately affect communities of color. 
  The plan, which aims to register at least one million Democrats out of the state's three million unregistered eligible voters, will be a combination of old-school field operations, mail outreach, digital ads and door-to-door canvassing.
  It comes after Texas Democrats successfully blocked the state's expansive voting bill, known as S.B. 7, in a dramatic late-night walkout. But Republicans in the state, led by Gov. Greg Abbott, have pledged to return in a special session and pass a similar voting bill.
  Such Republican efforts have ''increased the need for this work,'' said Luke Warford, the chief strategy officer for the Texas Democratic Party. The voter registration effort, he continued, ''is certainly a way to combat voter suppression, and we need to combat voter suppression in other ways too, like the federal government to pass the For the People Act, or our House members to stop whatever the next iteration of S.B. 7 is in a special session.''
  The huge voter registration effort comes as Democrats across the country are struggling to stymie the Republican-led push to enact new voting restrictions through state legislatures that the G.O.P. controls. As of May 14, lawmakers had passed 22 new laws in 14 states to make the process of voting more difficult, according to the Brennan Center for Justice, a research institute.
  While Democrats nationwide are still hopeful that lawsuits against individual new voting laws will be successful, and that Congress will eventually pass one of the party's big federal election bills -- the For the People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act -- major voter registration campaigns could be another tool in Democrats' arsenal to counteract voting restrictions.
  Gilberto Hinojosa, the chairman of the Texas Democratic Party, said that the program would most likely cost $13 million to $14 million this year, making it the single biggest investment in voter registration by the state party in its history. And the party is embarking on the effort in an off-year for national elections, an often sleepy time with a disengaged electorate and a recharging political base.
  Texas Democrats were buoyed by their surge in turnout in the 2020 election despite losing at the presidential level and failing to flip either chamber of the State Legislature. But they face mounting questions about their strength among Latino voters, who backed former President Donald J. Trump in greater margins than in 2016, especially in southern counties in the state.
  But despite those struggles, state Democrats see a potential path to victory through a pool of unregistered eligible voters that they say is overwhelmingly young and diverse.
  ''We have historically had turnout issues in Texas, particularly with the Latino community, which is a big part of our base,'' Mr. Hinojosa said.
  The program will take a targeted, nearly voter-by-voter approach to registration. If a voter lives in an apartment building and has no phone number on record, the first outreach will probably be an in-person visit or a flyer left by a volunteer with registration information. Younger voters will be targeted with online ads. And a new app called Register Texas (different from a 2020 web tool by the same name) will allow activists to sign in and find canvassing opportunities to register for.
  The effort follows the blueprint laid out by Stacey Abrams in Georgia, with Texas Democrats aiming to cover every corner of the state to find voters to register.
  ''We got clobbered in the rural areas and in West Texas,'' Mr. Hinojosa said. ''So we've got a lot of work to do, but we think we can do it. Because the payoff for the Democratic Party nationally is great. If you're able to take back the State Legislature, put yourself in the position of winning the next U.S. Senate race and also the governor's mansion, then Texas is well on its way to becoming the battleground state that everybody wants it to be.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); VOTERS & VOTING (92%); VOTER REGISTRATION (91%); ELECTION LAW (90%); RACE & ETHNICITY (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); COMPANY STRATEGY (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); RIGHT TO VOTE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (71%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (70%); EXECUTIVES (52%); SUITS & CLAIMS (50%)
 Person: GREG ABBOTT (79%); JOHN LEWIS (58%)
 Geographic: TEXAS, USA (95%)
 Load-Date: June 9, 2021

 

End of Document
Merrick Garland announces Justice Dept. plans to protect voting access.
The New York Times 
June 11, 2021 Friday 10:53 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 689 words
Byline: Katie Benner
Highlight: The attorney general says he will add to voting-rights law enforcement staff and scrutinize new laws that curb voter access.
Body




The attorney general says he will add to voting-rights law enforcement staff and scrutinize new laws that curb voter access.
Attorney General Merrick B. Garland laid out a detailed plan on Friday for protecting voting rights, announcing that the Justice Department would double enforcement staff on the issue, scrutinize new laws that seek to curb voter access and act if it sees a violation of federal law. 
Mr. Garland announced his plan as Republican-led state legislatures push to enact new restrictive voting laws, and amid dwindling chances for sweeping federal voter protection laws introduced by Democrats.
“To meet the challenge of the current moment, we must rededicate the resources of the Department of Justice to a critical part of its original mission: enforcing federal law to protect the franchise for all eligible voters,” Mr. Garland said in an address at the department. 
The Justice Department will also scrutinize current laws and practices to determine whether they discriminate against nonwhite voters, he said. It was not clear how many people work on voting rights enforcement, nor what the total would be after the department adds to the staffing levels.
In more than a dozen states, at least 22 new laws have been passed that make it more difficult to vote, according to the Brennan Center for Justice, a progressive public policy institute that is part of the New York University School of Law.
Mr. Garland also said that the department was monitoring the use of unorthodox postelection audits that could undermine faith in the nation’s ability to host free and fair elections, adding that some jurisdictions have used disinformation to justify such audits. 
“Many of the justifications proffered in support of these postelection audits and restrictions on voting have relied on assertions of material vote fraud in the 2020 election that have been refuted by the law enforcement and intelligence agencies of both this administration and the previous one, as well as by every court — federal and state — that has considered them,” Mr. Garland said.
The department’s Civil Rights Division has sent a letter expressing concerns that one of those audits may have violated the Civil Rights Act, Mr. Garland said, in part because it could violate a provision in the act that bars voter intimidation. He did not specify which state, but in Arizona, a weekslong audit is widely seen as a partisan exercise to nurse grievances about Donald J. Trump’s election loss.
The Justice Department will publish guidance explaining the civil and criminal statutes that apply to postelection audits and guidance on early voting and voting by mail, and will work with other agencies to combat disinformation.
Democrats have sued over some new voting laws, but that litigation could take years to resolve and may have little power to stop those laws from affecting upcoming elections. 
Two major federal election bills  — the For the People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act — are also the subject of fierce debate in Congress. 
Earlier this week, Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, said that he would oppose the For the People Act, dashing hopes among progressives that the far-reaching bill intended to fight voter suppression would become law. 
Mr. Garland has said that protecting the right to vote is one of his top priorities as attorney general, and his top lieutenants include high-profile voting rights advocates such as Vanita Gupta, the department’s No. 3 official, and Kristen Clarke, the head of the Civil Rights Division. 
Ms. Clarke’s long career advocating on behalf of voting rights protections — including at the N.A.A.C.P. Legal Defense and Educational Fund, the New York attorney general’s office and the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law — will make her a key player in the Justice Department’s work to preserve voting access. 
But that work is made more difficult by a 2013 Supreme Court decision that struck down pieces of the Voting Rights Act that forced states with legacies of racial discrimination to receive Justice Department approval before they could change their voting laws.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); ELECTION MONITORING (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RIGHT TO FREE ELECTIONS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); PARTISANSHIP (76%); FRANCHISING LAW (73%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (73%); MAIL-IN VOTING (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); ELECTION FRAUD (68%); Garland, Merrick B (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%)
 Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (93%)
 Industry: LAW SCHOOLS (78%)
 Person: MERRICK B GARLAND (94%); JOHN LEWIS (58%); Garland, Merrick B
 Geographic: ARIZONA, USA (79%)
 Load-Date: June 14, 2021

 

End of Document
Civil rights leaders press Manchin for a path forward on voting rights, but he remains unmoved on a broad bill.
The New York Times 
June 8, 2021 Tuesday 15:16 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 708 words
Byline: Nicholas Fandos, Katie Rogers and Jonathan Weisman
Highlight: The virtual meeting came two days after Mr. Manchin unequivocally stated his opposition to the Democrats’ landmark elections bill.
Body




The virtual meeting came two days after Mr. Manchin unequivocally stated his opposition to the Democrats’ landmark elections bill. 
Prominent civil rights leaders implored Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia on Tuesday to help find a path forward in Congress for legislation to protect voting rights, making a case to the measure’s most vocal Democratic opponent that enacting it was an existential imperative.
The virtual meeting between Mr. Manchin and the leaders of the N.A.A.C.P., the National Urban League and the National Action Network had been scheduled for weeks, and it yielded no breakthroughs. But it was particularly timely, coming two days after the West Virginian made his most unequivocal statement yet in opposition to the Democrats’ landmark elections bill, the For the People Act, and to gutting the legislative filibuster. 
The statements appeared to close off the only viable pathway for broad legislation that would counter a wave of Republican state laws restricting access to the ballot.
Attendees said their goal had been to begin building a relationship with Mr. Manchin, a centrist from a deep red state, and appealing to him for action — not to stoke a confrontation. The conversation was scant on policy details, though Mr. Manchin told the leaders that he planned to continue a long-shot attempt to build Republican support for a narrower voting bill that would beef up the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
“At the N.A.A.C.P., we understand the sausage-making of public policy and because of that, we appreciate Senator Manchin and the pivotal role he plays,” said Derrick Johnson, the group’s president and chief executive. “So this was an opportunity to work toward a solution, not complain about a problem.”
But Mr. Johnson did suggest that Mr. Manchin’s stated position that he could not support “partisan” voting legislation — meaning any bill that lacked the support of at least some Republicans — was untenable. Others were blunter.
“Let me be clear here. We opened by asking him to reconsider his position,” said Marc H. Morial, president and chief executive of the National Urban League. “He did not say he is going to reconsider his position. But we’re not giving up.”
Speaking with reporters afterward, Mr. Manchin praised the civil rights leaders as “the most powerful, informative and respectful group I’ve spoken to in a long time.” He said he intended to talk with the group again, though the discussion had not prompted him to reconsider his views.
“I don’t think anybody changed positions on that; we’re just learning where everyone’s coming from,” Mr. Manchin said.
Mr. Manchin had previously said he was opposed to changing the filibuster rule, and did not support the For the People Act, also known as Senate Bill 1. But on Sunday, he made those hypothetical positions more concrete, in an op-ed in the Charleston Gazette Mail that stated plainly that he planned to would vote ‘no’ later this month when Democratic leaders hold a vote on Senate Bill 1. He also said he would never support changing the rules which require proponents of legislation to muster 60 votes to move past a filibuster, dashing the hopes of many of his colleagues that he could eventually be persuaded to do so.
Party leaders were unbowed on Tuesday. Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader, said he would plow ahead with a vote on the bill later this month and was engaged in private talks with Mr. Manchin about changing the bill to win his vote to advance debate.
“Is it possible we might change a few things here and there? Mr. Schumer said. “We’re going to do it.”
The Rev. Al Sharpton, the president and founder of the National Action Network, said that he and other civil rights leaders could not get a clear answer from Mr. Manchin on substantive concerns he had with the voting measure, other than to say he wanted to find Republicans who would support such a bill. 
“I think we made it clear that it was unlikely,” Rev. Sharpton said in an interview. “I’m a minister, but there’s a difference between faith and fantasy.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: CIVIL RIGHTS (93%); ELECTION LAW (92%); FILIBUSTER (91%); RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); EXECUTIVES (89%); POLITICS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); CENTRISM (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); RACE & ETHNICITY (71%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); National Assn for the Advancement of Colored People (%); National Action Network (%); National Urban League (%); Senate (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Johnson, Derrick (1968- ) (%); Sharpton, Al (%); Law and Legislation (%)
 Organization: NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE (83%); NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (83%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (93%); AL SHARPTON (73%); Manchin, Joe III; Johnson, Derrick (1968- ); Sharpton, Al
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (92%)
 Load-Date: June 8, 2021

 

End of Document
Outmatched on State Voting Laws, Democrats Aim for Hearts and Minds
The New York Times
May 8, 2021 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1668 words
Byline: By Reid J. Epstein and Nick Corasaniti
Body




Lacking effective legislative or legal ways to stop Republicans from introducing new voting limits, Democrats are applying pressure on their allies in Washington and trying to energize supporters.
Democrats are struggling to build a surefire legal strategy to block new Republican-backed restrictions on voting rights, relying on broadly worded warnings and urgent pleas that are designed, in part, to build political pressure on the White House, Congress and the Justice Department to act, as well as to engage their supporters to mobilize in advance of the 2022 midterm elections. 
  The approach is aimed at persuading recalcitrant Senate Democrats in Washington to pass a sweeping federal elections bill, painting the new Republican laws in the news media as suspect on arrival, and convincing the swing voters who last year helped elect President Biden that the G.O.P. is more interested in fixing elections for itself than in winning those voters back.
  Locked out of power in the Republican-run states that are enacting laws making it harder to vote, Democrats are engaged in a partywide effort to push back against the legislation that has as much to do with winning hearts and minds outside courtrooms as it does legal victories inside them.
  ''We're taking an all-of-the-above approach because we can't allow these things to stand,'' Jaime Harrison, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said in an interview on Friday. ''As Democrats, we have to make this personal and we have to tell the story as to why this is important. This is fundamental. The most fundamental thing we have to do is protect the right of all folks to vote.''
  Republican laws passed in Georgia and Florida, along with a bill advancing in Texas, have so many new provisions that Democrats find troublesome both politically and legally that it is proving overwhelming to confront the measures one by one in court. Instead, the liberal push has become more focused on political outreach to ensure that progressive voters are sufficiently outraged about the new laws to apply pressure on senators and get out the vote next year.
  ''No one is going to file a 2,000-page brief,'' said Myrna Pérez, the director of the voting rights and elections program at the Brennan Center for Justice, a nonpartisan think tank. ''The energy spent educating voters about what's going on, and then energy spent trying to stop it, is consuming resources from the bread-and-butter work that groups like mine do.''
  Many of the voting bills have been able to sail through Republican-controlled legislatures because the Supreme Court gutted the Voting Rights Act in 2013, which hollowed out the ''preclearance'' provision that required certain states, mostly in the South, to gain federal approval before making changes to voting laws.
  With the Voting Rights Act now far weaker, voting rights activists say that litigation is often the only way to fight new restrictions, and an imperfect one at that.
  ''Case-by-case litigation in the voting context is time-consuming, costly, and ultimately inadequate because even if you win a case, frequently these kinds of laws remain on the books for one or more election cycle before litigation can be complete, and there's no way to compensate people after the fact,'' said Dale Ho, the director of the Voting Rights Project at the American Civil Liberties Union, which litigated several major cases last year.
  Beyond lawsuits, Democrats are grappling with the long-term question of how to make crucial gains in G.O.P.-led legislatures where state demographics, years of gerrymandering and the prospect of Republicans mapping themselves into another decade of control when redistricting takes place later this year have given conservatives a nearly unbreakable grip on power.
  In Florida, where Gov. Ron DeSantis signed the state's new voting law on Thursday, Democrats are reckoning with decades of party disinvestment in down-ballot elections and issuing dire warnings that nothing will improve without wholesale changes in how the party invests in local contests.
  Raymond Paultre, the executive director of the Florida Alliance, an often secretive network of progressive donors that has in the past been at odds with the Florida Democratic Party, said on Friday that the new laws in Georgia and Florida and the bill advanced by Texas Republicans illustrated the need for more resources to be directed to state legislative races.
  ''We are living in and through sort of the remnants and results of a lack of investments in state infrastructure for the last 30 years,'' Mr. Paultre said. ''We don't have a clear way of stopping these bills. Let's use this as a wake-up call. Let's get as upset with ourselves as we are with the Republicans.''
  At the same time, Florida Democrats are already envisioning how they will use the new law as part of their campaigns in the midterm elections to paint Republicans as being opposed to Black and Hispanic people's right to vote.
  ''People want us to push back,'' said Fentrice Driskell, a state representative from Tampa. ''We recognize that the '22 election cycle will be a great opportunity to try and do that.''
  Democrats' legal case against the Florida law, filed by the party's top election lawyer, Marc Elias, argues that the legislation violates the First Amendment's protection of free speech, and the 14th Amendment on the grounds that it would adversely affect people of color. Another suit, filed on Thursday by the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, also argues that the law violates the First and 14th Amendments, as well as Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act and the Americans With Disabilities Act -- because many drop boxes are likely to be moved to indoor locations that are inaccessible to people with disabilities.
  Sam Spital, the director of litigation for the legal defense fund, said that while he believed the lawsuits would prevail, the only comprehensive solution to Republican efforts to restrict voting would come from the federal government -- both Congress and the Justice Department.
  ''It is incumbent upon Congress to exercise its authority to make sure that we're not going to have this kind of voter suppression,'' he said.
  Mr. Elias said he was seeking to make the legal case that the Florida law violates First Amendment free speech rights because it restricts what voters can be told when they register to vote. The 14th Amendment argument is that the law violates Supreme Court doctrine known as the Anderson-Burdick test, which requires courts to balance new burdens on voters against the benefits that the state claims are being added to its voting system.
  Mr. Elias makes his legal case daily on Twitter, where he promotes his Democracy Docket website and, on Friday afternoon, hosted a 40-minute live chat on Twitter Spaces, the site's live audio chat feature, in which he explained civil rights and election laws to about 170 people who tuned in.
  The numerous lawsuits from Mr. Elias and others have not rattled the Republican National Committee's legal team, which views them as an effort to drum up outrage as much as a legal challenge. And, they argue, the lawsuits will be very hard to prove.
  ''The state is going to need to basically provide a justification that outweighs any potential burden on the right to vote,'' said Justin Riemer, the chief counsel for the R.N.C. ''And the fact of the matter is, the Democrats will be unable to provide evidence that shows that these laws actually impair voting rights and make it harder to vote.''
  Instead, Mr. Riemer saw the lawsuits as an attempt to force Democrats in Washington to act.
  ''They're trying to have Congress solve the problem for them by actually imposing a new legal standard for bringing these claims,'' Mr. Riemer said.
  In Texas, a flurry of late amendments and procedural moves were still unable to halt the Republican bill from being passed at 3 a.m. on Friday. The bill, which became slightly less restrictive after the late-night adjustments, still greatly empowers partisan poll watchers, bars election officials from proactively mailing out absentee ballots, and sets strict punishments for election officials who run afoul of regulations while helping voters who require assistance.
  Hours after the bill passed, Democrats in Texas looked to Congress for help.
  ''Democrats will continue to work together to quickly pass federal legislation that ensures the rights of the people to vote are protected in all 50 states,'' said Gilberto Hinojosa, the chairman of the Texas Democratic Party.
  In the hours between Mr. DeSantis's signing of the Florida law and Texas House Republicans' passing their voting bill early Friday, progressive groups spoke out about their desire for Congress to pass Democrats' big election bills, the For the People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act.
  The For the People Act, which is far broader, would mandate national automatic voter registration and no-excuse early voting and mail-in voting; neuter restrictive state voter identification laws; and create independent redistricting commissions for congressional districts and new dark-money transparency measures. The John Lewis act would reinstitute the federal preclearance requirement for changing election laws.
  The For the People Act has passed the House and remains stalled in the Senate, where Democrats lack both 60 votes to avoid a filibuster and an agreement among themselves over whether the legislation can proceed with a simple majority vote. The John Lewis bill has not yet passed the House.
  Representative John Sarbanes, a Democrat from Maryland who serves as chairman of the party's Democracy Reform task force, said Friday that congressional Democrats' voting legislation, if enacted, would carry more weight than any court victory could.
  ''There will be court decisions and challenges in the future,'' he said, ''but what we're really trying to do is reset the table on what our democracy looks like.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (95%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (91%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); APPROVALS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); US CONGRESS (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (50%)
 Company:  DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (54%)
 Organization:  DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (54%)
 Industry: NAICS813940 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (54%); SIC8651 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (54%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: May 8, 2021

 

End of Document
Inside Democrats’ Scramble to Repel the G.O.P. Voting Push
The New York Times 
May 7, 2021 Friday 19:49 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1682 words
Byline: Reid J. Epstein and Nick Corasaniti
Highlight: Lacking effective legislative or legal ways to stop Republicans from introducing new voting limits, Democrats are applying pressure on their allies in Washington and trying to energize supporters.
Body




Lacking effective legislative or legal ways to stop Republicans from introducing new voting limits, Democrats are applying pressure on their allies in Washington and trying to energize supporters.
Democrats are struggling to build a surefire legal strategy to block new Republican-backed restrictions on voting rights, relying on broadly worded warnings and urgent pleas that are designed, in part, to build political pressure on the White House, Congress and the Justice Department to act, as well as to engage their supporters to mobilize in advance of the 2022 midterm elections.
The approach is aimed at persuading recalcitrant Senate Democrats in Washington to pass a sweeping federal elections bill, painting the new Republican laws in the news media as suspect on arrival, and convincing the swing voters who last year helped elect President Biden that the G.O.P. is more interested in fixing elections for itself than in winning those voters back.
Locked out of power in the Republican-run states that are enacting laws making it harder to vote, Democrats are engaged in a partywide effort to push back against the legislation that has as much to do with winning hearts and minds outside courtrooms as it does legal victories inside them.
“We’re taking an all-of-the-above approach because we can’t allow these things to stand,” Jaime Harrison, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said in an interview on Friday. “As Democrats, we have to make this personal and we have to tell the story as to why this is important. This is fundamental. The most fundamental thing we have to do is protect the right of all folks to vote.”
Republican laws passed in Georgia and Florida, along with a bill advancing in Texas, have so many new provisions that Democrats find troublesome both politically and legally that it is proving overwhelming to confront the measures one by one in court. Instead, the liberal push has become more focused on political outreach to ensure that progressive voters are sufficiently outraged about the new laws to apply pressure on senators and get out the vote next year.
“No one is going to file a 2,000-page brief,” said Myrna Pérez, the director of the voting rights and elections program at the Brennan Center for Justice, a nonpartisan think tank. “The energy spent educating voters about what’s going on, and then energy spent trying to stop it, is consuming resources from the bread-and-butter work that groups like mine do.”
Many of the voting bills have been able to sail through Republican-controlled legislatures because the Supreme Court gutted the Voting Rights Act in 2013, which hollowed out the “preclearance” provision that required certain states, mostly in the South, to gain federal approval before making changes to voting laws.
With the Voting Rights Act now far weaker, voting rights activists say that litigation is often the only way to fight new restrictions, and an imperfect one at that.
“Case-by-case litigation in the voting context is time-consuming, costly, and ultimately inadequate because even if you win a case, frequently these kinds of laws remain on the books for one or more election cycle before litigation can be complete, and there’s no way to compensate people after the fact,” said Dale Ho, the director of the Voting Rights Project at the American Civil Liberties Union, which litigated several major cases last year.
Beyond lawsuits, Democrats are grappling with the long-term question of how to make crucial gains in G.O.P.-led legislatures where state demographics, years of gerrymandering and the prospect of Republicans mapping themselves into another decade of control when redistricting takes place later this year have given conservatives a nearly unbreakable grip on power.
In Florida, where Gov. Ron DeSantis signed the state’s new voting law on Thursday, Democrats are reckoning with decades of party disinvestment in down-ballot elections and issuing dire warnings that nothing will improve without wholesale changes in how the party invests in local contests.
Raymond Paultre, the executive director of the Florida Alliance, an often secretive network of progressive donors that has in the past been at odds with the Florida Democratic Party, said on Friday that the new laws in Georgia and Florida and the bill advanced by Texas Republicans illustrated the need for more resources to be directed to state legislative races.
“We are living in and through sort of the remnants and results of a lack of investments in state infrastructure for the last 30 years,” Mr. Paultre said. “We don’t have a clear way of stopping these bills. Let’s use this as a wake-up call. Let’s get as upset with ourselves as we are with the Republicans.”
At the same time, Florida Democrats are already envisioning how they will use the new law as part of their campaigns in the midterm elections to paint Republicans as being opposed to Black and Hispanic people’s right to vote.
“People want us to push back,” said Fentrice Driskell, a state representative from Tampa. “We recognize that the ’22 election cycle will be a great opportunity to try and do that.”
Democrats’ legal case against the Florida law, filed by the party’s top election lawyer, Marc Elias, argues that the legislation violates the First Amendment’s protection of free speech, and the 14th Amendment on the grounds that it would adversely affect people of color. Another suit, filed on Thursday by the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, also argues that the law violates the First and 14th Amendments, as well as Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act and the Americans With Disabilities Act — because many drop boxes are likely to be moved to indoor locations that are inaccessible to people with disabilities.
Sam Spital, the director of litigation for the legal defense fund, said that while he believed the lawsuits would prevail, the only comprehensive solution to Republican efforts to restrict voting would come from the federal government — both Congress and the Justice Department.
“It is incumbent upon Congress to exercise its authority to make sure that we’re not going to have this kind of voter suppression,” he said.
Mr. Elias said he was seeking to make the legal case that the Florida law violates First Amendment free speech rights because it restricts what voters can be told when they register to vote. The 14th Amendment argument is that the law violates Supreme Court doctrine known as the Anderson-Burdick test, which requires courts to balance new burdens on voters against the benefits that the state claims are being added to its voting system.
Mr. Elias makes his legal case daily on Twitter, where he promotes his Democracy Docket website and, on Friday afternoon, hosted a 40-minute live chat on Twitter Spaces, the site’s live audio chat feature, in which he explained civil rights and election laws to about 170 people who tuned in.
The numerous lawsuits from Mr. Elias and others have not rattled the Republican National Committee’s legal team, which views them as an effort to drum up outrage as much as a legal challenge. And, they argue, the lawsuits will be very hard to prove.
“The state is going to need to basically provide a justification that outweighs any potential burden on the right to vote,” said Justin Riemer, the chief counsel for the R.N.C. “And the fact of the matter is, the Democrats will be unable to provide evidence that shows that these laws actually impair voting rights and make it harder to vote.”
Instead, Mr. Riemer saw the lawsuits as an attempt to force Democrats in Washington to act.
“They’re trying to have Congress solve the problem for them by actually imposing a new legal standard for bringing these claims,” Mr. Riemer said.
In Texas, a flurry of late amendments and procedural moves were still unable to halt the Republican bill from being passed at 3 a.m. on Friday. The bill, which became slightly less restrictive after the late-night adjustments, still greatly empowers partisan poll watchers, bars election officials from proactively mailing out absentee ballots, and sets strict punishments for election officials who run afoul of regulations while helping voters who require assistance.
Hours after the bill passed, Democrats in Texas looked to Congress for help.
“Democrats will continue to work together to quickly pass federal legislation that ensures the rights of the people to vote are protected in all 50 states,” said Gilberto Hinojosa, the chairman of the Texas Democratic Party.
In the hours between Mr. DeSantis’s signing of the Florida law and Texas House Republicans’ passing their voting bill early Friday, progressive groups spoke out about their desire for Congress to pass Democrats’ big election bills, the For the People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act.
The For the People Act, which is far broader, would mandate national automatic voter registration and no-excuse early voting and mail-in voting; neuter restrictive state voter identification laws; and create independent redistricting commissions for congressional districts and new dark-money transparency measures. The John Lewis act would reinstitute the federal preclearance requirement for changing election laws.
The For the People Act has passed the House and remains stalled in the Senate, where Democrats lack both 60 votes to avoid a filibuster and an agreement among themselves over whether the legislation can proceed with a simple majority vote. The John Lewis bill has not yet passed the House.
Representative John Sarbanes, a Democrat from Maryland who serves as chairman of the party’s Democracy Reform task force, said Friday that congressional Democrats’ voting legislation, if enacted, would carry more weight than any court victory could.
“There will be court decisions and challenges in the future,” he said, “but what we’re really trying to do is reset the table on what our democracy looks like.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (97%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (91%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); APPROVALS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); LITIGATION (66%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (50%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Absentee Voting (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Law and Legislation (%); State Legislatures (%); States (US) (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Civil Rights and Liberties (%)
 Company:  DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (54%)
 Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%);  DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (54%)
 Industry: NAICS813940 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (54%); SIC8651 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (54%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: August 26, 2021

 

End of Document
Deep Divide on Voting Rights Is Testing Biden's Instinct to Negotiate
The New York Times
May 28, 2021 Friday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 1757 words
Byline: By Katie Rogers
Body




The president's long history of deal making on the issue is crashing into the realities of a more sharply partisan time.
WASHINGTON -- As President Biden confronts intense Republican opposition to the broad voting rights bill that Democrats have made a top priority this year, he might remember back to 1982 and an earlier partisan clash over the issue, one of a number across the years that shaped his views on deal making -- and its limits. 
  A key provision of the Voting Rights Act, prohibiting states from denying the vote to people on the basis of race, was facing a high-profile Senate debate over its extension. The Senate Judiciary Committee, the panel handling the legislation, was led by Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, but aware of the optics of having a former segregationist as their public face for negotiations, Republicans instead chose Senator Bob Dole of Kansas to lead them in talks about a deal.
  Representing the other side was Mr. Biden, then in his second term as a senator from Delaware. Mr. Biden was not as well known as another Democrat on the committee, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, but he did have one advantage: Republicans tended to listen to him.
  ''He wanted to do the right thing, but he wanted to do it in a way that built consensus,'' Sheila Bair, who served as a longtime counsel to Mr. Dole, said in an interview. ''Biden recognized that if you want this to be lasting, we needed a big margin.''
  In meetings, Mr. Biden and Mr. Dole encouraged Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, a Republican who privately wanted to be helpful, according to two former Senate aides from that era. ''This is an opportunity for you to demonstrate that you can be bipartisan,'' Mr. Biden told Mr. Grassley at the time, according to one of the aides who recalled the interaction. (A spokesman for Mr. Grassley said he had always been supportive of the Voting Rights Act, and was a key player in the 1982 extension of the law.)
  In another meeting, Mr. Biden pointed out to Mr. Thurmond that the tide was turning: ''We're going to win anyhow, Strom.''
  The legislation passed, 85 to 8, in June 1982. In the end, Mr. Thurmond was among the Republicans who voted for it.
  ''The votes that Ted Kennedy was bringing were going to be there no matter what,'' Ms. Bair said. ''Biden had his own journey on civil rights, and in a weird kind of way, that gave him more credibility with people like Strom Thurmond.''
  Mr. Biden's long experience in working across the aisle in the Senate -- and his evolution from opponent of school busing to proponent of using the government to address issues of racial equity -- taught him crucial lessons about navigating politically combustible civil rights issues.
  Yet even with his decades of work on the topic, he faces especially wrenching decisions when it comes to the voting rights legislation. Known as the For the People Act, the bill is the professed No. 1 priority of Democrats this year. It would overhaul the nation's elections system, rein in campaign donations and limit partisan gerrymandering. But after passing the House, it hit a wall of Republican opposition in the Senate.
  With little likelihood of the measure winning enough Republican support to meet the 60-vote threshold necessary for passage, Mr. Biden now faces a choice: Scale back his ambitions for addressing voting rights or abandon hopes of a bipartisan compromise and instead seek to jam it through on a partisan vote in the equally divided chamber by further rolling back one of the foundations of Senate tradition, the filibuster.
  Along with his push for a bipartisan compromise on his infrastructure proposal, it is the clearest choice he has faced yet between his instinct to negotiate and confronting the realities of Senate partisanship in 2021.
  Mr. Biden always preferred private strategy sessions to showy displays. ''He was the one behind the scenes who was making it look easy,'' Barbara Boxer, the former Democratic senator from California, said in an interview. ''That was his huge contribution.''
  But Mr. Biden was also unafraid of openly challenging political adversaries -- often on the basis of their past work to curb civil rights or voting access -- and he could be effective at bringing moderate Republicans around to his way of thinking.
  One of the biggest fights of his career came in 1985, when Mr. Biden, then the top Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee, led a bipartisan effort to stop the nomination of William Bradford Reynolds, then the chief of the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department under President Ronald Reagan, to become associate attorney general.
  In televised hearings, Mr. Biden targeted Mr. Reynolds's oversight of a redistricting effort in Louisiana that split a majority Black district around New Orleans in two, a move that kept Black voters in the minority. During one hearing, Mr. Biden pointed out that Mr. Reynolds had been aware that an official involved in the redistricting effort had repeatedly used a racial slur.
  In a rebuke of the Reagan administration's track record on civil rights, two Republicans from the Judiciary Committee voted with Democrats to oppose Mr. Reynolds's nomination.
  A year later, Mr. Biden opposed the nomination of Jeff Sessions for a federal judgeship in Alabama. Mr. Biden's objections stemmed, in large part, from comments that were widely criticized as racist, but also from Mr. Sessions's past prosecution of three Black people who were later acquitted of voting fraud charges. Faced with a split committee vote, the White House later pulled Mr. Sessions's nomination.
  By 1987, Mr. Biden had sharpened his reputation as a moderate who could win over Republicans on the grounds of what one former Senate aide called an ability ''to appeal to their better angels'' on civil rights matters.
  That year, Mr. Biden -- then in the midst of his first presidential campaign -- led yet another effort to defeat a Reagan-era nominee: Robert H. Bork, whom the president had chosen for the Supreme Court. Alarmed by Mr. Bork's past criticism of rulings on the rights of African Americans and women, Mr. Biden by that time had a well-honed playbook: He approached moderate Republicans, including Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, who could also help widen the margins on the final vote.
  ''We already had Bork beat,'' Mark Gitenstein, a close friend of Mr. Biden's and a former Senate aide, told The New York Times in 2019. ''But Biden really wanted to get Warner because he had such stature.''
  In the end, six Republicans, including Mr. Warner, who died on Tuesday, joined the effort to scuttle the Bork nomination. It was a vote that solidified Mr. Biden's reputation as a Democrat who could use bipartisan negotiations -- rather than brute-force politics -- to achieve his goals.
  ''If you look at the things that have animated him over the past 50 years, this is one,'' Ted Kaufman, a former senator from Delaware and a close Biden adviser, said in an interview. 
  The problem, of course, is that very little about the Senate operates the way it did when Mr. Biden served there. Mr. Biden has also changed. As president, he is no longer the quintessential moderate and has instead embraced the most ambitious progressive agenda of any president in generations.
  But, his advisers say, he did not ever foresee that voting rights would become such a divisive issue, or that Democrats would be seeking support for an expansive bill that aimed to beat back some 361 bills in 47 states trying to tighten voting rules.
  ''I don't think in his wildest dreams he'd ever thought we'd be talking about these issues at this point in our lives,'' Mr. Kaufman said. ''He fought this before with Strom Thurmond and Jesse Helms. It was a recurring theme, but not at this level. This feels much more systemic.''
  Measures to curb voting rights have elicited some of Mr. Biden's most aggressive language as president. He recently took aim at a law passed by Republicans in Georgia, which the president called ''un-American'' and ''sick.''
  Many Democrats, who have hit a wall in their negotiations to win Republican backing for the For the People Act, are hoping to use G.O.P. opposition as an argument for eliminating a legislative filibuster and allowing the bill to pass with a simple majority. But at least one Democrat, Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, remains opposed to the idea, potentially scuttling it.
  Another option, which Mr. Manchin supports, is for Democrats to focus on a bill with a narrower scope. That bill, named for John Lewis, the civil rights leader and Georgia Democrat who died last year, would restore a piece of the Voting Rights Act that relied on a formula to identify states with a history of discrimination and require that those jurisdictions clear any changes to their voting processes with the federal government. Those protections were stripped away by the Supreme Court in 2013.
  Faced with such slim odds over the more ambitious piece of legislation, Mr. Biden has privately reminded members of his own party in White House meetings that, with any bill, there are must-haves and like-to-haves.
  In a recent meeting with members of the Congressional Black Caucus in the Oval Office, Mr. Biden urged them to consider the pieces of the bill they could live without.
  He stressed to the group that the measure's chances were low without compromise.
  ''He was really concerned about navigating through the Senate,'' said Representative Brenda Lawrence, Democrat of Michigan. ''He said that in a number of situations: 'We have to get this done.'''
  Mr. Biden has yet to say publicly how he intends to proceed. He has avoided getting involved in negotiations over the legislation. But the president has also been reluctant to come out in public support of eliminating the filibuster, especially since Mr. Manchin -- a vital vote for nearly all of the president's priorities -- has so far opposed doing so, effectively taking that option off the table for now.
  Still, Mr. Biden has signaled a willingness to go further if Republicans do not negotiate.
  ''If we have to, if there's complete lockdown and chaos as a consequence of the filibuster, then we'll have to go beyond what I'm talking about,'' Mr. Biden said in March during his first news conference with reporters.
  The president's advisers say the public should take him at his word.
  ''It's usually best to listen to what he says,'' Mr. Kaufman said. ''Because that's usually what he thinks.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PARTISANSHIP (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); ELECTION LAW (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (72%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (77%); TED KENNEDY (57%)
 Geographic: DELAWARE, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: May 28, 2021

 

End of Document
In Two Arizona Democrats, a Reflection of the Divide on Voting Rights
The New York Times
June 19, 2021 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 1699 words
Byline: By Jennifer Medina
Body




Ms. Hobbs, the Arizona secretary of state, saw her star rise as she fought Republicans' election falsehoods. Senator Kyrsten Sinema, a fellow Democrat, insists on a bipartisan approach to voting rights.
PHOENIX -- The political fortunes of Katie Hobbs, the Arizona secretary of state, have risen unlike any other Democrat in the country in the tumultuous aftermath of the 2020 presidential election. Now running for governor, she has emerged as a high-profile defender of the state's election results and critic of Republican attempts to overturn the outcome. 
  Her path stands in stark contrast to that of another prominent Arizona Democrat: Senator Kyrsten Sinema, a self-styled maverick who seems to relish thumbing her nose at liberals and has angered many Democrats in recent weeks.
  Insisting on bipartisanship, Ms. Sinema has become, along with Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, a key intraparty roadblock to President Biden's agenda. This week, all eyes in Washington have been on Ms. Sinema and other moderate senators as they pursue a bipartisan infrastructure bill. But by refusing to eliminate the filibuster, she and other Democratic senators have left in doubt the passage of sweeping voting rights legislation that many on the left view as of utmost importance in the face of a nationwide Republican crackdown.
  Ms. Hobbs, by contrast, has gained newfound fame in her party for facing down withering attacks from Republicans -- including death threats against her and her family that prompted round-the-clock security from state troopers -- and for denouncing a widely criticized G.O.P. audit of votes in the state's largest county as a sham and a threat to democracy. Now she is the most popular statewide elected official, according to some polls, and is starting a bid for governor with more than $1 million in her campaign's coffers.
  Ms. Hobbs's position is unique in part because several other officials who defended results at key moments in contested states like Georgia and Michigan were Republican -- but in Arizona, the secretary of state was an ambitious Democrat enthusiastic about making headlines.
  ''If things had gone differently with the election, or the amount of exposure that I got after the election, I don't feel like I would be in such a strong position,'' Ms. Hobbs said in an interview in a Phoenix coffee shop. ''I certainly don't think that things would be going as well as they are so far.''
  Democrats' sharply divergent views of Ms. Hobbs and Ms. Sinema illustrate the party's divisions over how to best press its advantage in Arizona, a once reliably Republican battleground that Mr. Biden narrowly flipped last year, as well as its differences over how to approach the partisan battle over voting rights and restrictions.
  Some Democrats, like Ms. Hobbs, want to aggressively confront Republicans to counteract the wave of G.O.P. voting restrictions being enacted across the country. But others, including Ms. Sinema, are reluctant to take drastic actions, like abolishing the Senate filibuster, that would be required to pass the party's big voting bills, and they are hopeful of finding elusive compromise with Republicans.
  The question is especially difficult for Democrats in Arizona's uncertain political terrain, with Republicans continuing their recount there despite widespread condemnation. While the majority of voters in the state tell pollsters they oppose the audit, roughly 40 percent say they support it, a reflection of how deeply former President Donald J. Trump's election falsehoods continue to resonate. And it remains unclear just how independents, who make up about a third of all voters in the state, will appraise the hotly contested recount.
  Ms. Sinema has appeared to make a political calculation that voters will not punish her for taking positions that make her a pariah among the most ardent Democrats, and Ms. Hobbs could face a difficult battle in the general election for governor if she scares away Republican voters.
  Despite her rise amid the turmoil, Ms. Hobbs remains pragmatic about the persistent election conspiracy theories.
  ''Certainly no rational person would have thought we'd still be talking about it now,'' she said. ''We've been saying all along that the misinformation is dangerous -- I don't think anyone wanted to imagine how dangerous it is.''
  In such a national environment, it has become all but impossible to reach the type of bipartisan consensus upon which Ms. Sinema has staked her career and reputation.
  Much of Democrats' scrutiny of the senator stems from her defense of the filibuster, a procedural tactic that currently allows Republicans to block most of their rivals' legislative proposals. Ms. Sinema argues that the filibuster is essential for American governance.
  ''It is a tool that protects the democracy of our nation, rather than allowing our country to ricochet wildly every two to four years back and forth between policies,'' Ms. Sinema said this month, standing alongside Senator John Cornyn, a Republican, at an event in Tucson. ''I think I am a daily example that bipartisanship is possible,'' she added, suggesting that other senators should change their behavior, rather than ''eliminate the rules or change the rules.''
  Last week, Arizona Democrats signed a letter urging Ms. Sinema to reform the filibuster -- apparently conceding that she would not reverse her position and move to abolish it entirely. And this week, Ms. Hobbs wrote a guest essay in The Washington Post urging Ms. Sinema to support the For the People Act, the broader of Democrats' two big federal voting bills, arguing that ''we both know that if we do nothing now, Arizonans' access to the ballot will be stripped away by Republican legislators.'' (Mr. Manchin's opposition to the broader bill means that Democrats do not currently have the votes for the legislation -- which Ms. Sinema supports -- even without the filibuster.)
  For many political veterans in the state, Ms. Sinema's stance is hardly surprising, given that she has worked with Republicans throughout her career. But many activists are furious that she has not shifted her position with Democrats now in control of the House, Senate and White House, and Republicans repeatedly blocking their legislation. Activists have openly talked about recruiting a challenger to Ms. Sinema in the primary race for her seat in 2024, when she is up for re-election.
  ''Senator Sinema's leadership has been deeply disappointing,'' said Alejandra Gomez, a co-executive director of Lucha, a civil rights group that has helped several Democrats win in the state. ''What's very clear is that now that we have a majority, she does not know how to govern. She does not know how to take advantage and be nimble.''
  Arizona is roughly evenly split among Democratic, Republican and independent voters. And both Ms. Sinema and Ms. Hobbs were elected thanks to coalitions of moderate independents and progressive activists whose get-out-the-vote efforts have shifted the state to the left. (Aides to Ms. Sinema point out that all of the Democrats who have won statewide elections in recent years have billed themselves as moderates.)
  Historically, Ms. Hobbs and Ms. Sinema share a similar approach and background -- both worked as social workers before entering politics and have built reputations as bipartisan dealmakers. In the past, Ms. Sinema was something of a mentor to Ms. Hobbs, encouraging her to run for office and ascend in state politics.
  But Ms. Hobbs has distanced herself from Ms. Sinema in recent weeks. And many activists on the left see the potential for the secretary of state to become something that the senator is not: a political leader powered in part by constituents' frustration. Some of Ms. Hobbs's early success suggests that anger at Republicans is fueling her campaign -- she has said that her strong fund-raising of more than $1 million in the last six months probably would not have been possible without the recount. Nearly every time she is attacked by Mr. Trump or other prominent Republicans, she said, her donations surge.
  And Ms. Hobbs has acknowledged that she cannot win her bid for governor without support from the left.
  ''I'm someone who will always acknowledge the people that helped me get where I am,'' she said. ''I'm not going to turn my back on people.''
  Ms. Hobbs will face at least one opponent in the Democratic primary, and Ms. Gomez said that the candidate could secure support from the left only if she made clear that she would ''take bold action and lead in a visionary way, to disrupt the Arizona of the past -- not hiding behind bipartisanship.''
  But as Ms. Hobbs has started to become a hero for the left in Arizona, Ms. Sinema is increasingly alienated from members of her own party.
  ''Every day I am telling activists and donors and Democrats that we need to make sure that we are voicing our opinions and voicing the agenda,'' said Raquel Terán, a state representative and the chair of the Arizona Democratic Party. ''But at the end of the day, we know we have a senator where it's hard to say if she's going to move. The part for us right now is that we raise our opinion and express our position. We're going to have to fight hard and make sure that nothing is off the table.''
  While some progressive activists have all but given up on Ms. Sinema, others are more optimistic that protest and pressure will prompt her to shift her approach, particularly if she hears from more moderate voters.
  Susan Minato, a co-president of Unite Here Local 11, which represents hospitality workers in Arizona, said she was urging Ms. Sinema to host a town hall event during the upcoming summer break from Congress. Such an approach would be unusual for a senator who rarely appears at unscripted events or takes questions from reporters (her office declined to make her available for this article.)
  ''We're very worried about our country, and she needs to begin to listen to understand why,'' Ms. Minato said. ''The jury is still out on whether we can change her mind. We're not in a fight with Senator Sinema. We're in a fight for democracy, and we're in it for the long haul.''
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: BIPARTISANSHIP (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); GOVERNORS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); POLITICS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (64%)
 Person: KYRSTEN SINEMA (92%); JOE BIDEN (79%); JOE MANCHIN (58%)
 Geographic: PHOENIX, AZ, USA (58%); ARIZONA, USA (95%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 19, 2021

 

End of Document
Four House Democrats urge party leaders to fight for an expansive voting rights bill.
The New York Times 
May 20, 2021 Thursday 07:34 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 624 words
Byline: Astead W. Herndon
Highlight: The Democrats, seeking to push back on party leaders, sent an email calling for the party to muscle through a robust voting rights package, rather than a narrower one.
Body




The Democrats, seeking to push back on party leaders, sent an email calling for the party to muscle through a robust voting rights package, rather than a narrower one.
In the latest example of divisions among congressional Democrats over voting rights, four House Democrats emailed the party caucus on Thursday pushing for their colleagues to muscle through two election bills now being considered on Capitol Hill, arguing that “democracy is on the line.”
The email, which was signed by Representatives Mondaire Jones of New York, Val Demings of Florida, Nikema Williams of Georgia and Colin Allred of Texas, represented not-so-subtle pushback to recent statements from influential Democrats like Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, who have each expressed to the caucus a preference for a more narrow strategy.
The most ambitious legislation Democrats have put forward is the For the People Act, a sweeping bill to overhaul the nation’s elections system that would protect voting rights, reduce the role of money in politics, strengthen enforcement of existing election laws and limit gerrymandering. They have also introduced the narrower John Lewis Voting Rights Act, which would restore crucial parts of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that were struck down by the Supreme Court in 2013, including the preclearance requirements under which some states mostly in the South had to receive federal approval before changing their election laws.
The email from the four representatives argues that passing only the John Lewis Act — which Democrats like Mr. Manchin and Mr. Clyburn have recently told other members they would prefer — would be an insufficient response to the spate of voting restrictions Republicans have enacted across the country since the 2020 presidential election. The email states that passing the narrower bill alone would leave too much up to the courts, do little about laws already enacted, do nothing to reduce partisan gerrymandering, and would still be no closer to Senate passage.
“John Lewis’s final fight was to champion both the For the People Act that contains his Voter Empowerment Act and the Voting Rights Act that now bears his name,” the email states, invoking the name of the Georgia representative and civil rights icon, who died last year. “Not since the Jim Crow era have we seen laws explicitly aimed at suppressing the votes of Black, Brown, and young Americans like those being considered in state capitals across the nation right now.”
“Any proposal that shuns H.R. 1 in favor of nationwide preclearance alone is either dangerously naïve or simply misinformed about what is happening in states across the country,” the email reads. “Time is running out.”
Mr. Clyburn and other members of the Congressional Black Caucus have privately expressed discomfort with independent redistricting commissions. Those commissions would eliminate gerrymandering, which has been a thorn in the side of Democrats seeking to win swing districts but has also helped spur the rise of Black representation throughout the South, packing large numbers of Black voters into single urban districts.
President Biden has frequently emphasized the importance of voting rights legislation, but has yet to weigh in on which bill he would prefer to reach his desk, if not both. The measures are both unlikely to pass the Senate, where Republicans broadly oppose them, unless Democrats alter the Senate filibuster rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: ELECTION LAW (92%); POLITICS (92%); RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CAUCUSES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LICENSING AGREEMENTS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); REDISTRICTING (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); ELECTION REFORM (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (76%); FILIBUSTER (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); APPROVALS (65%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%); SUPREME COURTS (65%); Democratic Party (%); House of Representatives (%); Jones, Mondaire (1987- ) (%); Demings, Val (%); Williams, Nikema (%); Allred, Colin (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Law and Legislation (%); United States Politics and Government (%)
 Person: MONDAIRE JONES (93%); ABBY FINKENAUER (92%); COLIN ALLRED (79%); JAMES CLYBURN (79%); NIKEMA WILLIAMS (79%); VAL DEMINGS (79%); JOE MANCHIN (58%); JOHN LEWIS (58%); Jones, Mondaire (1987- ); Demings, Val; Williams, Nikema; Allred, Colin
 Geographic: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 1, 2021

 

End of Document
The Threat of Day X; The Daily Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 25, 2021 Friday 14:04 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: PODCASTS
Length: 1381 words
Byline: Lauren Jackson
Highlight: Why democratic collapse isn’t so remote as a possibility. Plus, what it means to defund the police.
Body




Why democratic collapse isn’t so remote as a possibility. Plus, what it means to defund the police.
Hi everyone, we hope by now you’ve heard (at least some of) our new series, Day X. Our story starts with a German military officer who faked a refugee identity in an alleged far-right assassination plot intended to bring down the government. And over the past five weeks, we’ve explored how this case cracked the door open to a network of far-right extremists inside the German military and the police. We’ve asked some big questions, too, about what this means for the country’s future and the threat to democracies around the world more broadly.
While the series is focused on Germany’s present, it’s a story inseparable from Germany’s past. So we’ve compiled a guide to understanding the country’s far right over the past century. Below, we explain why understanding this history is essential for making sense of the threat of far-right extremism to America’s democracy, too.
Drawing parallels across centuries — and across continents
Just over a century ago, after accepting its defeat in World War I through an armistice, the German government signed the Treaty of Versailles, in which the victorious Allies set the terms and price of peace.
The treaty declared Germany to blame for the war and ordered it to pay vast reparations, limit its armed forces and surrender territory. These bitter concessions became emblems of a powerful myth, particularly widespread among veterans: that Germany’s military could have won the war, but instead had been betrayed and humiliated by the civilian leadership.
This toxic conspiracy theory, known as the “stab-in-the-back legend,” became a keystone of Nazi propaganda — in which the civilian leaders were portrayed as the puppets of leftists and Jews. After the war, many newly unemployed soldiers in Germany joined paramilitary groups that eventually supported the rise of Nazism. The groups, which were animated by a sense of grievance, plotted coups and assassinated politicians in the Weimar Republic in the decade before Hitler came to power. In Day X, Katrin Bennhold, The Times’s Berlin bureau chief, interviews Franco A., a military officer on trial on charges of plotting terrorism. Like the members of the paramilitary groups in the 1920s, Franco A. believes in a Jewish conspiracy to destroy the German nation and is accused of plotting one or several assassinations meant to bring down the democratic government.
In conversation with Amanda Taub, one of our Interpreter columnists, Cynthia Miller-Idriss, the director of the Polarization and Extremism Research and Innovation Lab at American University, explained how this alleged plot has parallels with what we have witnessed unfolding in the rise of the American far right, specifically the events on Jan. 6.
Both this alleged plot and the insurrection at the Capitol could be cited as examples of an “accelerationist” ideology, in which far-right groups promise a moment when the institutions of government, society and the economy will be wiped out in a wave of catastrophic violence, clearing the way for a utopia that will supposedly follow. Cynthia sees this thinking present in both the German and American far right.
“In many ways, we can see how Jan. 6 was a kind of loosely formed coalition around this idea of accelerationism,” she said. “My fear is that we are, as a country, starting to treat that like a one-time fluke rather than as a potential turning point.”
She also explained the lessons to be learned from German history.
“I have thought a lot about the parallels with the Weimar Republic,” the fragile period of democracy in Germany whose collapse allowed the Nazis to take power, Cynthia said. It was marked by a series of attacks, failed coups and other efforts to undermine democracy. And even though actions like Hitler’s beer-hall putsch failed, German democracy was ultimately not strong enough to withstand the chaos.
That has made her alarmed by recent efforts to view the Jan. 6 attacks as a one-off.
“For me, the parallel is that I think a lot of people want to see Jan. 6 as the end of something,” she said. “I think we have to consider the possibility that this was the beginning of something.”
Confused about what “defunding the police” means? Here are some answers.
This week, instead of calling one of our colleagues at The Times, we dedicated an episode to a conversation between a mother and daughter. They were sharing their perspectives, sometimes heatedly, about a topic that was a point of tension in the New York City mayoral race — but also across the country more broadly.
Yumi Mannarelli, who self-identifies as a socialist and is a registered Democrat in New York, supports the movement to defund the police, believing that money and energy put into police departments could be put to better use targeting causes of crime — such as enacting gun control legislation and tackling homelessness.
Her mom, Misako Shimada, however, is unconvinced. With recent attacks against Asian Americans and rising crime in the city, she explained that she believed there were good police officers and their presence made her feel safer.
Many of you wrote in with questions about some of the positions they shared, including: What does it mean to defund the police? And what could that look like in practice?
So we’ve compiled a few resources if you’re curious about learning more.
A playlist for your weekend
Summer is finally here. So once you get caught up on Day X, we’ve compiled a playlist of four feel-good narrated articles for you to listen to whether you’re basking in the sun, sheltering from the heat or just in the mood for something lighter.
Listen to this story: The Way We Worked Out
In this article, Kate Dwyer explores the glamour of the 1980s in an unlikely place: The Vertical Club, a Manhattan gym that was cooler than a nightclub.
“People come to see and be seen,” Tom DiNatale, the club’s general manager, told The Times in 1984.
In its heyday, it was a place where celebrities worked out — its clientele included Mick Jagger, David Bowie, Cher and Diana Ross. Today, its fingerprints are still all over our modern spaces from Equinox to SoulCycle.
Listen to this story: After Helping Her Husband Gain Freedom, Maya Moore Savors Her Own
Maya Moore was the 2014 W.N.B.A. M.V.P. and Jonathan Irons was known to some as Inmate No. 101145. Their meet cute happened at a prison ministry in a maximum-security detention center in Missouri. Maya and her family believed in Jonathan’s innocence and, together, they eventually got his conviction vacated after 23 years.
“There is life we want to live, things we want to do, things we feel called to do together to help make our world a better place,” Maya told Kurt Streeter, who writes the Sports of The Times column. “This sense of freedom is huge for both of us now.”
Listen to this story: An Ode to the Filet-O-Fish
In her letter of recommendation for The New York Times Magazine, Jane Hu extols the virtues of a McDonald’s sandwich that is often overlooked: the Filet-O-Fish.
It’s a story about the billboard-famous sandwich, but it’s a story about family, childhood, identity and the ubiquity of Alaskan pollock, too.
On The Daily this week
Monday: Will the Supreme Court step in and settle the fight over restrictive voting laws?
Tuesday: Ahead of the New York City mayoral race, we speak to a mother and daughter about police reform.
Wednesday: The For the People Act could have been the most sweeping expansion of voting rights in a generation. What lessons can we take from its demise
Thursday: How an export ban has left millions of people without coronavirus vaccines and imperiled the reputation of the world’s largest vaccine maker.
Friday: The final part of “Day X.”
That’s it for The Daily newsletter. See you next week.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: FAR RIGHT POLITICS (92%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); POLITICAL EXTREMISM (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); ASSASSINATION (89%); CONSPIRACY (89%); CONSPIRACY THEORY (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); FASCISM (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); WRITERS (78%); 2021 US CAPITOL RIOTS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); CEASEFIRES (77%); CONSERVATISM (77%); COUPS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); TERRORISM (77%); WAR REPARATIONS (77%); WORLD WAR I (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); REFUGEES (72%); UNEMPLOYED PERSONS (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%); JEWS & JUDAISM (62%); Germany (%); Right-Wing Extremism and Alt-Right (%); Neo Nazi Groups (%)
 Industry: WRITERS (78%); ARMED FORCES (77%); PODCASTING (73%)
 Geographic: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); GERMANY (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (79%)
 Load-Date: June 25, 2021

 

End of Document
Deadlock on Democrats' Voting Bill Presages Obstacles on Senate Floor
The New York Times
May 12, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 1551 words
Byline: By Nicholas Fandos
Body




Democrats now face the task of overcoming their own differences on the measure, and deciding whether they will use it as a vehicle to try to curb the filibuster.
WASHINGTON -- A key Senate committee deadlocked on Tuesday over Democrats' sweeping proposed elections overhaul, previewing a partisan showdown on the Senate floor in the coming months that could determine the future of voting rights and campaign rules across the country. 
  The tie vote in the Senate Rules Committee -- with nine Democrats in favor and nine Republicans opposed -- does not prevent Democrats from moving forward with the 800-page legislation, known as the For the People Act. Proponents hailed the vote as an important step toward adopting far-reaching federal changes to blunt the restrictive new voting laws emerging in Republican-led battleground states like Georgia and Florida.
  But the action confronted Democrats with a set of thorny questions about how to push forward on a bill that they view as a civil rights imperative with sweeping implications for democracy and their party. The bill as written faces near-impossible odds in the evenly divided Senate, where Republicans are expected to block it using a filibuster and at least one Democrat, Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, remains opposed.
  With their control in Washington potentially fleeting and Republican states racing ahead with laws to curtail ballot access, Democrats must reach consensus among themselves on the measure, and decide whether to attempt to destroy or significantly alter the Senate's filibuster rules -- which set a 60-vote threshold to overcome any objection to advancing legislation -- to salvage its chances of becoming law.
  ''Here in the 21st century, we are witnessing an attempt at the greatest contraction of voting rights since the end of Reconstruction and the beginning of Jim Crow,'' Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader, said at the session's outset.
  He cited a new law in Iowa restricting early and mail-in voting, another in Florida cutting back on the use of drop boxes and making it harder to vote by mail, and one in Georgia, where Democrats have attacked the decision to bar third parties from giving water or snacks to voters waiting in long lines.
  ''These laws carry the stench of oppression, the smell of bigotry,'' Mr. Schumer said, telling Republicans they faced a ''legacy-defining choice.'' ''Are you going to stamp it out, or are you going to spread it?''
  Among other changes, Democrats' bill would essentially overwrite such changes by setting a nationwide floor on ballot access. Each state would be required to implement 15 days of early voting, no-excuse vote by mail programs like the ones many states expanded during the pandemic and automatic and same-day voter registration. Voting rights would be restored to those who had served prison sentences for felonies, and states would have to accept a workaround neutering voter identification laws that Democrats say can make it harder for minorities to vote.
  Over eight hours of debate, the clash only served to highlight how vast philosophical differences over elections have come to divide the two parties in the shadow of former President Donald J. Trump's lies about fraud and theft in the 2020 contest.
  Republicans gave no indication they were willing to cede any ground to Democrats in a fight that stretches from the Capitol in Washington to state houses across the country. Instead, with Mr. Schumer's Republican counterpart, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, taking the lead, they argued that Democrats were merely using state laws as a fig leaf to justify an unnecessary and self-serving federal power grab ''cooked up at the Democratic National Committee.''
  ''Our democracy is not in crisis, and we're not going to let one party take over our democracy under the false pretense of saving it,'' Mr. McConnell said.
  He and other Republicans on the committee were careful to sidestep many of Mr. Trump's outlandish claims of fraud, which have taken deep root in the party, fueling the Jan. 6 assault on the Capitol and prompting state lawmakers to adjust their election laws. But in a late-afternoon statement, Mr. Trump, who still towers over the party, made clear the connection between those lies and the push to curb ballot access, calling for every state to adopt restrictive voting laws, including voter-identification requirements, ''so we never again have an election rigged and stolen from us.''
  ''The people are demanding real reform!'' Mr. Trump wrote.
  While the Rules Committee vote fulfilled Democrats' pledge to thoroughly consider the bill before it reached the floor, it left an enormous challenge for Mr. Schumer. Progressive activists are spending millions of dollars to ramp up pressure on Democrats to quickly scrap the filibuster or miss a chance to implement the changes before 2022. The bill already passed the House with only Democratic votes.
  ''What is intense pressure now is only going to grow,'' said Eli Zupnick, a former Senate leadership aide and a spokesman for Fix Our Senate, a coalition of liberal groups pushing to eliminate the filibuster. ''There is no way out. There is no third option. It is either the filibuster or the For the People Act.''
  But Mr. Manchin and a small group of others remain uncomfortable both with changing Senate rules and with provisions of the underlying bill, which also includes a public financing system for congressional candidates, far-reaching new ethics requirements for Congress and the White House, an end to gerrymandering congressional districts and dozens of other significant changes.
  Democratic senators plan to meet privately Thursday afternoon to begin deliberations over how to move forward, according to two Democratic officials who discussed the scheduled private session on the condition of anonymity.
  At least some senators appear ready to make wholesale changes if necessary to win the support of Mr. Manchin and other hesitant Democrats. One of them, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, said the stakes were ''existential'' if Democrats failed.
  ''If we can't unify behind it, I think there are going to be some tough decisions to maybe set pieces of it aside,'' Mr. Kaine said in an interview.
  Democrats proposed only modest changes during Thursday's marathon session in the Rules Committee.
  Republicans rejected a large package of changes meant to address concerns raised primarily by state elections administrators who have complained that some voting provisions would be expensive or onerous to implement.
  Republicans also rejected a proposal by Senator Jon Ossoff, Democrat of Georgia, to strike down bans, like one included in Georgia's new law, on providing water to voters stuck in long lines to cast ballots.
  When the time came to offer their own amendments, Republicans were far more ambitious, submitting 150 proposals to kill various pieces of the bill. Ultimately, they demanded votes on only a couple of dozen, many of which forced Democrats to defend positions Republicans believe are politically unpopular.
  Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri, the top Republican on the committee, tried to strip the provision creating a public financing system that would match small donations to congressional candidates with federal funds. Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, argued the case against it most vividly, calculating how much each member of the committee might receive in matching funds, including $24 million for himself.
  ''Your constituents in every one of your states, I would venture, do not want to give your campaigns or my campaign millions of dollars in federal funds,'' he said. ''We do not need welfare for politicians.''
  Democrats pointed out that the public financing would be optional, but defended it as far preferable to the current system, in which politicians largely rely on a small number of wealthy donors and special interests to bankroll their campaigns. The amendment failed.
  ''If people want to pay for their campaigns with big-money donors instead, I guess that's what they'll do,'' said Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, the committee chairwoman.
  In a sign of the how seriously both parties took the debate, Mr. McConnell, who rarely attends hearings as party leader, remained glued to the dais for much of the day, sparring vigorously with Democrats. He was most animated in opposition to proposed changes to campaign finance laws, reprising his role as the Senate's pre-eminent champion of undisclosed, unlimited political spending.
  ''Regardless of who has a partisan advantage here -- let's just put that aside -- is it the business of the government to supervise political speech, to decide what you can say about an issue that may be in proximity to an election?'' he said.
  Mr. McConnell called unsuccessfully for dropping language that would require super PACs to disclose the identities of their big donors and a proposed restructuring of the Federal Election Commission to make it more partisan.
  Mr. Ossoff pushed back. Arguing that there was often no difference between the objectives of super PACs and traditional campaigns, he said, ''The public should have the right to know who is putting significant resources into influencing the views of the voters.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (92%); ELECTION LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); MAIL-IN VOTING (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); DEMOCRACIES (79%); ELECTIONS (79%); PARTISANSHIP (79%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (77%); VOTER REGISTRATION (72%)
 Person: CHARLES SCHUMER (59%); JOE MANCHIN (59%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (92%); GEORGIA, USA (92%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: May 12, 2021

 

End of Document
Why Manchin Is Emphasizing Bipartisanship
The New York Times
June 12, 2021 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 2084 words
Byline: By Trip Gabriel
Body




The senator has become a lightning rod in his party and a major obstacle to President Biden's agenda. In his home state, his stubborn belief in bipartisanship is recognized as the core of his being.
FARMINGTON, W.Va. -- Decades ago, John Manchin Jr., a civic leader in a small coal town in West Virginia, lent his support to a Democrat running for Congress. His candidate lost to a Republican named Arch Moore Jr. 
  After the election, Mr. Manchin applied for a federal loan to keep his furniture store afloat. He received a call from his newly sworn-in congressman, Mr. Moore, offering to help. Mr. Manchin reminded Mr. Moore that he had worked for his opponent. ''John, maybe you've forgotten,'' Mr. Moore said. ''I took an oath of office that I would represent everybody in my district.''
  The small-business man seeking the loan was the father of today's Democratic senator from West Virginia, Joe Manchin III. And the congressman who helped secure the loan was the father of the state's Republican senator, Shelley Moore Capito. The younger Mr. Manchin recalled the episode in a 2015 eulogy for Mr. Moore, extracting a lesson about how politics can transcend partisan labels.
  Today, as President Biden pursues a broad agenda on infrastructure, voting rights and climate change, Mr. Manchin, the vacillating 50th vote in Democrats' control of the Senate, has become perhaps his party's most contentious figure. He has vowed to withhold support from bills that are not bipartisan, insisted he will not weaken the filibuster and preached to Democrats to ''have faith'' that there are enough ''good people'' in the Republican Party to avoid gridlock -- a view increasing numbers of Democrats deride as naïve, or worse.
  This week he angered Democrats by spelling out in a newspaper column that he would oppose his party's broad voting rights bill and would never vote to end the legislative filibuster.
  It has thrown a dark cloud over Democrats' hopes for major legislation ahead of the 2022 midterm elections. Frustrated with Mr. Manchin and confused about his motives, many Democrats have asked: Why, in seeking an armistice with Republicans, has he allowed himself to become one of their greatest weapons?
  But back home in West Virginia, Mr. Manchin's stubborn belief in working across the aisle is recognized as the core of his being, not mere posturing for a conservative state where he may seek re-election.
  Mr. Manchin is a former quarterback who relishes holding leverage over Democratic policy, along with his place in the national spotlight. His insistence on bipartisanship in Washington stems from his years as governor, when he brought warring factions together on some thorny issues; from West Virginians' resentment of the liberal wing of the Democratic Party; and from an earlier era when national politics was viewed through a small-town lens, like that in Mr. Manchin's hometown, Farmington, where his die-hard Democratic father received help from a Republican.
  Even though the hyperpartisan Senate is not the collegial place it once was -- where members argued by day and then dined together at night -- and even though small-town West Virginia, with its coal-ravaged mountaintops, can seem a nostalgic anachronism, both institutions dwell as ideals in Mr. Manchin, according to people who know him.
  ''There is a lot of 'Mr. Smith Goes to Washington' in Joe Manchin,'' said Jim Humphreys, who served in the State Legislature with him and has worked on Capitol Hill. ''There is a sense of, 'I need to do what's right, and if I have a legacy in the Senate, that's what it's going to be.'''
  On Thursday, Mr. Manchin was part of a bipartisan group of 10 senators that reached a deal on an infrastructure package, though it is far from assured that enough Republicans are willing to join them to overcome a filibuster.
  Mr. Humphreys said that Mr. Manchin's optimism might be outdated in the era of Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican minority leader, who has said his chief priority is to stop Mr. Biden. ''I don't think Joe Manchin is naïve,'' Mr. Humphreys said. ''I'd say he holds expectations of the good will of other people that may not be met because they may not have that much good will.''
  A significant influence on Mr. Manchin's values, according to interviews with a dozen West Virginia political figures, is that party labels in the state are fluid. Until recently, West Virginians voted overwhelmingly for Democrats. Now they vote overwhelmingly for Republicans. Despite that, Mr. Manchin has survived and thrived as a Democrat who believes that he can reach all sides.
  ''All the people he grew up with were Democrats; they're not anymore, but in his eyes, they haven't changed -- they're the same people,'' said Jonathan Kott, a former top aide to Mr. Manchin in Washington.
  Both Mr. Manchin's father and his grandfather were mayors of Farmington, a hamlet tucked into a seam in the state's northern mountains. Today, Main Street is anchored by a Family Dollar and the Manchin Clinic, a practice run by a brother of the senator's. Town Hall has a food drop labeled ''Take a Blessing/Leave a Blessing.'' The community was the site of a devastating 1968 coal mine explosion that killed 78 men, including one of Mr. Manchin's uncles.
  Another uncle, A. James Manchin, was given a prominent job in state government by Arch Moore Jr., who became governor, further entwining the Manchin and Moore political dynasties, even though they represented different parties.
  A. James Manchin was a flamboyant orator and a backslapper, qualities some see echoed in Joe Manchin. Billy Wayne Bailey, a former Democratic state lawmaker, recalled A. James Manchin's advice on politics: ''He said to me, 'Billy Wayne, if you can't preach with the preachers and drink with the drunks, you need to find another line of work.'''
  Relations between the Manchin and the Moore families embodied a small state's scratch-my-back alliances. (A. James Manchin was impeached by the Legislature, and Mr. Moore served a prison term on unrelated corruption charges.)
  As a young man working for his father's business, Joe Manchin measured the home of the newly married Shelly Moore Capito for carpeting.
  Ms. Capito was the lead Republican negotiator with the White House on its infrastructure plan until Mr. Biden broke off talks this past week, unable to coax Republicans into accepting a big enough package after cutting his first proposal by more than half.
  For Democrats hoping that Mr. Manchin will see Republicans as committed to gridlock and that he would be willing to take drastic measures, the senator made clear in The Charleston Gazette-Mail on Sunday that he would never vote to end the legislative filibuster.
  In doing so, he most likely doomed the For the People Act, the Democrats' sweeping bill aimed at countering voting restrictions in Republican-controlled states, which many Democrats see as an existential threat to fair elections and to their party.
  Mr. Manchin argued that ''partisan policymaking'' in Congress on elections ''won't instill confidence in our democracy -- it will destroy it.''
  ''It's a core belief with Joe that our politics has become too tribal and hyperpartisan, and he looks at his legacy as someone who has been able to get things done, to work with both sides,'' said Mike Plante, a Democratic strategist who has advised Mr. Manchin as well as opponents of his.
  Mr. Manchin, who is 73, spent 14 years in the Legislature before first seeking statewide office, an ill-fated run for governor in 1996. He lost to a more liberal Democrat in a nasty primary and then refused to support the party's nominee in the general election (she lost). Chastened by the campaign, Mr. Manchin modified some of his conservative, pro-business positions.
  He was elected secretary of state in 2000 and made a second bid for governor -- this one successful -- in 2004, running as a problem-solver. Once in office, he broke down lines separating some longtime opponents.
  Reforming the money-losing workers' compensation system had been a third rail in West Virginia politics. The state-run program paid generous benefits to workers injured in the state's dangerous industries -- coal, natural gas and timber -- but it had $3 billion in unfunded liabilities.
  Mr. Manchin, who in private life was successful as a coal broker but was elected with the support of labor unions, pushed to privatize insurance and for the coal companies to pay higher taxes.
  ''Joe found a way to make it work: The state stopped hemorrhaging money, and the unions supported it,'' Mr. Plante said.
  Meanwhile, West Virginia was shifting against Democrats more rapidly than almost any state in the country. Democrats held all but two of 34 State Senate seats in the early 1990s. Today, Republicans hold supermajorities in both legislative chambers.
  Political agility kept Mr. Manchin viable as the state moved so rapidly. He embraced the social conservatism of its white rural electorate -- opposing abortion, gun control and federal environmental regulations -- while convincing working people that he had their back economically.
  The state's inflection point was 2014. West Virginians took out their anger at President Barack Obama up and down the ballot. The Democratic State Senate majority leader was ousted by a used-car salesman who had not raised a dime. Ms. Capito became the first Republican elected to the U.S. Senate in generations.
  The trend accelerated under President Donald J. Trump, who won the state by nearly 40 percentage points in November. Mr. Manchin is the last Democrat in statewide office, and it's unlikely his party would retain the seat if he retires in 2024.
  Protected from a primary threat from the left, he is free to voice objections to progressive policies that other moderate Democrats in the Senate may privately agree with him on but won't state publicly.
  As governor, Mr. Manchin kept a party tent on the lawn of the Executive Mansion for months at a time, inviting a wide array of West Virginians to events -- a concrete symbol of the inclusiveness he hoped to promote.
  ''Joe Manchin has always felt whether you agree with him or not, let's meet and talk about it,'' said Nick Joe Rahall II, a former Democratic congressman from West Virginia. ''When he brought people together like that, even people who have publicly lambasted him, they came out of those meetings praising Joe Manchin.''
  But Mr. Rahall, who lost his seat in the 2014 G.O.P. wave, is not certain Mr. Manchin's approach to seeking common ground works anymore in Washington. ''I'm not sure it can continue to happen,'' he said.
  Mr. Manchin occupies the seat previously held by Robert C. Byrd, the longtime Democratic leader who wrote a four-volume history of the Senate.
  Mr. Manchin, whose office did not make him available for an interview for this article, often cites Mr. Byrd's reverence for the institution and its constitutional role to protect small states and minority rights as reasons to insist on bipartisan support for major legislation, such as voting rights reform.
  But paradoxically, one law that Mr. Manchin passionately supports, the Affordable Care Act, passed the Senate with only Democratic votes. Mr. Byrd, in the last year of his life, attended midnight sessions of the Senate in a wheelchair to vote for the health care law, which greatly benefited people in West Virginia, whose population is high in poverty and high in illness.
  Mr. Rahall recalled that Mr. Manchin, as governor, called to lobby him to pass the health care law when he was one of a few wavering Democrats in the House.
  Does that make Mr. Manchin hypocritical about insisting on bipartisan support for voting rights or infrastructure bills?
  Fellow Democrats in West Virginia weren't ready to say so.
  One meeting of opposites Mr. Manchin brokered as governor fell outside the realm of public policy. Mr. Manchin cajoled the state's two major universities, W.V.U. and Marshall, to agree to an annual game.
  A history of hard feelings had kept the teams from playing regularly. The first ''Friends of Coal Bowl'' was played in 2006. The next year, W.V.U. visited its rival's campus for the first time in 92 years. The W.V.U. Mountaineers won every one of seven matchups. But after 2012, the rivalry fell apart, a victim of athletic mismatch and unmet expectations.
  By then, Mr. Manchin was gone from the governor's office. He was pursuing his dreams of comity in Washington.
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); PARTISANSHIP (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); POLITICS (89%); CONSERVATISM (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (78%); SMALL BUSINESS (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (76%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); GOVERNORS (73%); ATHLETES (71%); ELECTION REFORM (71%); CEASEFIRES (60%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (89%); JOE MANCHIN (79%); SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO (79%)
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 12, 2021

 

End of Document
Florida and Texas Join the March as Republicans Press Voting Limits
The New York Times 
May 6, 2021 Thursday 10:29 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1788 words
Byline: Nick Corasaniti and Reid J. Epstein
Highlight: The efforts in two critical battleground states with booming populations and 70 Electoral College votes between them represent the apex of the Republican effort to roll back access to voting.
Body




The efforts in two critical battleground states with booming populations and 70 Electoral College votes between them represent the apex of the Republican effort to roll back access to voting.
Hours after Florida installed a rash of new voting restrictions, the Republican-led Legislature in Texas pressed ahead on Thursday with its own far-reaching bill that would make it one of the most difficult states in the nation in which to cast a ballot.
The Texas bill would, among other restrictions, greatly empower partisan poll watchers, prohibit election officials from mailing out absentee ballot applications and impose strict punishments for those who provide assistance outside the lines of what is permissible.
After a lengthy debate that lasted into the early morning hours on Friday, the State House of Representatives passed the measure in a 81-64 vote, largely along party lines, at about 3 a.m., following a flurry of amendments that had been spurred by Democratic protests and a Democratic procedural move known as a point of order.
The new amendments softened some of the initial new penalties proposed for those who run afoul of the rules and added that the police could be called to remove unruly partisan poll watchers. Other amendments added by Democrats sought to expand ballot access, including with changes to ballot layout and with voter registration at high schools. But those amendments could be knocked off by a potential conference committee.
The bill will soon head to the Republican-controlled Senate following a third reading in the House. Gov. Greg Abbott has been supportive of the current voting bills in the legislature.
Briscoe Cain, the Republican sponsor of the bill, said he had filed it “to ensure that we have an equal and uniform application of our election code and to protect people from being taken advantage of.”
He was quickly challenged by Jessica González, a Democratic representative and vice chair of the House Election Committee, who argued that the bill was a solution in search of problem. She cited testimony in which the Texas secretary of state said that the 2020 election had been found to be “free, fair and secure.”
After the early-morning vote, Sarah Labowitz, policy and advocacy director of the A.C.L.U. of Texas, said in a statement, “Under cover of darkness, the Texas House just passed one of the worst anti-voting bills in the country.” She added, “Texans deserve better than to wake up and find out that lawmakers jammed through a law that will make participating in our democracy harder and scarier.”
Florida and Texas are critical Republican-led battleground states with booming populations and 70 Electoral College votes between them. The new measures the legislatures are putting in place represent the apex of the current Republican effort to roll back access to voting across the country following the loss of the White House amid historic turnout in the 2020 election.
Earlier on Thursday, Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, with great fanfare, signed his state’s new voting bill, which passed last week. Held at a Palm Beach hotel with cheering supporters in the background, the ceremony showcased Mr. DeSantis’s brash style; the governor’s office barred most journalists and provided exclusive access to Fox News, a nose-thumbing gesture of contempt toward a news media he viewed as overly critical of the bill.
“Right now, I have what we think is the strongest election integrity measures in the country,” Mr. DeSantis said, though he has praised Florida’s handling of last November’s elections.
Ohio, another state under complete Republican control, introduced a new omnibus voting bill on Thursday that would further limit drop boxes in the state, limit ballot collection processes and reduce early in-person voting by one day, while also making improvements to access such as an online absentee ballot request portal and automatic registration at motor vehicle offices.
Iowa and Georgia have already passed bills that not only impose new restrictions but grant those states’ legislatures greater control over the electoral process.
Republicans have pressed forward with these bills over the protests of countless Democrats, civil rights groups, faith leaders, voting rights groups and multinational corporations, displaying an increasing no-apologies aggressiveness in rolling back access to voting.
The efforts come as Republicans in Washington are seeking to oust Representative Liz Cheney from her leadership position in the House Republican caucus for her continued rejection of former President Donald J. Trump’s lies about the 2020 election, and as Republicans at a party convention in Utah booed Senator Mitt Romney for his criticism of the former president.
Together, the Republican actions reflect how deeply the party has embraced the so-called Big Lie espoused by Mr. Trump through his claims that the 2020 election was stolen.
Democrats, gerrymandered into statehouse minorities and having drastically underperformed expectations in recent state legislative elections, have few options for resisting the Republican efforts to make voting harder.
In Georgia and Texas, progressive groups applied pressure on local businesses to speak out against the voting measures. But Republican legislators have been conditioned during the Trump era to pay less attention to their traditional benefactors in chambers of commerce and more attention to the party’s grass roots, who are aligned with the former president and adhere to his lies about the 2020 election.
And in Florida, Democrats didn’t even manage to organize major local companies to weigh in on the voting law.
“Elections have consequences both ways, and we are living in the consequences of the Trumpiest governor in America here in Florida,” said Sean Shaw, a former state representative who was the 2018 Democratic nominee for Florida attorney general. “The ultimate strategy is, what are we going to do in 2022? How are we going to beat the dude?”
Mr. Shaw, who offered an extended laugh when first asked what his party’s strategy was for combating Florida’s new voting law, said he was planning to start a campaign this month to place referendums on the state’s 2022 ballots for constitutional amendments that would make voting easier.
“We are not Mississippi or Alabama,” he said. “We are not that kind of conservative state, but we are governed by this mini-Trump person. All we can do as Democrats is let the people know what they’ve got.”
Marc Elias, a Democratic lawyer, filed a lawsuit nine minutes after Mr. DeSantis had signed the legislation, saying that the new Florida law violated the First and 14th amendments to the U.S. Constitution.
“It’s not true that states could not change their voting laws whenever they want,” Mr. Elias said in an interview Thursday. “You have to weigh the burden on the voter with the interest of the state.”
Tom Perez, the former Democratic National Committee chairman, said a case could be made that the new voting laws would improperly make it harder for Black and Hispanic people to vote, and he called on the U.S. Justice Department to take the lead in the legal battle against the Republican-passed laws.
“Ten years ago when I was running the Civil Rights Division, the Georgia law would never have seen the light of day,” Mr. Perez said Thursday. “The Justice Department needs to get involved, and having the imprimatur of the Justice Department sends a really important message about our values.”
Mr. Biden’s nominee to lead the Civil Rights Division, Kristen Clarke, had a Senate hearing last month but has not yet been confirmed. Mr. Biden said in March, after the Georgia law had been signed by Gov. Brian Kemp, that the Justice Department was “taking a look” at how best to protect voting rights. A White House official said that the president, in his comments, had been assuming the issue was one the department would review.
Democrats argued on Thursday that the Republican crackdowns on voting in Florida and Texas had made it more urgent for the Senate to pass the For the People Act, which would radically reshape the way elections are run, make far-reaching changes to campaign finance laws and redistricting and mitigate the new state laws.
“We are witnessing a concerted effort across this country to spread voter suppression,” Jena Griswald, the Colorado secretary of state, said Thursday on a call with progressive groups in which the new Florida law was condemned. “The For the People Act levels the playing field and provides clear guidance, a floor of what is expected throughout the nation.”
The scene in Austin on Thursday was tense, as Republicans in the House decided to replace the language of a bill that passed the senate, known as SB 7, with the language of a House voting bill, known as HB 6. The swap removed some of the more onerous restrictions that had originally been proposed, like banning drive-through voting, banning 24-hour voting and adding limitations on voting machine allocation that could have led to a reduction of polling locations in densely populated areas.
But the bill before the House included a host of new restrictions. It bans election officials from proactively mailing out absentee ballot applications or absentee ballots; sets strict new rules for assisting voters and greatly raises the punishment for running afoul of those rules; greatly empowers partisan poll watchers; and makes it much harder to remove a partisan poll watcher for bad behavior. The expansion of the authority and autonomy of partisan poll watchers has raised voter intimidation concerns among civil rights groups.
In the debate Thursday evening, Mr. Cain, the sponsor of the House bill, was unable to cite a single instance of voter fraud in Texas. (The attorney general found 16 instances of minor voting fraud after 22,000 hours of investigation.)
Democratic lawmakers also seized on Texas’ history of discriminatory voting legislation and likened the current bill to the some of the state’s racist electoral practices of the past.
“In light of that history, can you tell me if or why you did not do a racial impact analysis on how this legislation would affect people of color?” said Rafael Anchía, a Democratic representative from Dallas County.
Mr. Cain admitted that he had not consulted with the attorney general’s office or conducted a study of how the bill might affect people of color, but he defended the bill and said it would not have a discriminatory impact.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (93%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); BALLOTS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PARTISANSHIP (90%); POLITICS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTION LAW (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); ELECTION WORKERS (78%); MAIL-IN VOTING (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (77%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (77%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (77%); TRENDS & EVENTS (77%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (76%); DISCRIMINATION (76%); RACE & ETHNICITY (76%); FINES & PENALTIES (75%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (71%); HIGH SCHOOLS (50%); Texas (%); Florida (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Law and Legislation (%); Republican Party (%); State Legislatures (%); Politics and Government (%); Voter Fraud (Election Fraud) (%); States (US) (%); Race and Ethnicity (%); Discrimination (%); Civil Rights and Liberties (%); United States Politics and Government (%)
 Industry: EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (50%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); GREG ABBOTT (79%)
 Geographic: TEXAS, USA (96%); FLORIDA, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: May 30, 2021

 

End of Document
What Drives Joe Manchin? Frustrated Democrats Can Look to West Virginia.
The New York Times 
June 11, 2021 Friday 16:56 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 2152 words
Byline: Trip Gabriel
Highlight: The senator has become a lightning rod in his party and a major obstacle to President Biden’s agenda. In his home state, his stubborn belief in bipartisanship is recognized as the core of his being.
Body




The senator has become a lightning rod in his party and a major obstacle to President Biden’s agenda. In his home state, his stubborn belief in bipartisanship is recognized as the core of his being.
FARMINGTON, W.Va. — Decades ago, John Manchin Jr., a civic leader in a small coal town in West Virginia, lent his support to a Democrat running for Congress. His candidate lost to a Republican named Arch Moore Jr.
After the election, Mr. Manchin applied for a federal loan to keep his furniture store afloat. He received a call from his newly sworn-in congressman, Mr. Moore, offering to help. Mr. Manchin reminded Mr. Moore that he had worked for his opponent. “John, maybe you’ve forgotten,” Mr. Moore said. “I took an oath of office that I would represent everybody in my district.”
The small-business man seeking the loan was the father of today’s Democratic senator from West Virginia, Joe Manchin III. And the congressman who helped secure the loan was the father of the state’s Republican senator, Shelley Moore Capito. The younger Mr. Manchin recalled the episode in a 2015 eulogy for Mr. Moore, extracting a lesson about how politics can transcend partisan labels.
Today, as President Biden pursues a broad agenda on infrastructure, voting rights and climate change, Mr. Manchin, the vacillating 50th vote in Democrats’ control of the Senate, has become perhaps his party’s most contentious figure. He has vowed to withhold support from bills that are not bipartisan, insisted he will not weaken the filibuster and preached to Democrats to “have faith” that there are enough “good people” in the Republican Party to avoid gridlock — a view increasing numbers of Democrats deride as naïve, or worse.
This week he angered Democrats by spelling out in a newspaper column that he would oppose his party’s broad voting rights bill and would never vote to end the legislative filibuster.
It has thrown a dark cloud over Democrats’ hopes for major legislation ahead of the 2022 midterm elections. Frustrated with Mr. Manchin and confused about his motives, many Democrats have asked: Why, in seeking an armistice with Republicans, has he allowed himself to become one of their greatest weapons?
But back home in West Virginia, Mr. Manchin’s stubborn belief in working across the aisle is recognized as the core of his being, not mere posturing for a conservative state where he may seek re-election.
Mr. Manchin is a former quarterback who relishes holding leverage over Democratic policy, along with his place in the national spotlight. His insistence on bipartisanship in Washington stems from his years as governor, when he brought warring factions together on some thorny issues; from West Virginians’ resentment of the liberal wing of the Democratic Party; and from an earlier era when national politics was viewed through a small-town lens, like that in Mr. Manchin’s hometown, Farmington, where his die-hard Democratic father received help from a Republican.
Even though the hyperpartisan Senate is not the collegial place it once was — where members argued by day and then dined together at night — and even though small-town West Virginia, with its coal-ravaged mountaintops, can seem a nostalgic anachronism, both institutions dwell as ideals in Mr. Manchin, according to people who know him.
“There is a lot of ‘Mr. Smith Goes to Washington’ in Joe Manchin,” said Jim Humphreys, who served in the State Legislature with him and has worked on Capitol Hill. “There is a sense of, ‘I need to do what’s right, and if I have a legacy in the Senate, that’s what it’s going to be.’”
On Thursday, Mr. Manchin was part of a bipartisan group of 10 senators that reached a deal on an infrastructure package, though it is far from assured that enough Republicans are willing to join them to overcome a filibuster.
Mr. Humphreys said that Mr. Manchin’s optimism might be outdated in the era of Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican minority leader, who has said his chief priority is to stop Mr. Biden. “I don’t think Joe Manchin is naïve,” Mr. Humphreys said. “I’d say he holds expectations of the good will of other people that may not be met because they may not have that much good will.”
A significant influence on Mr. Manchin’s values, according to interviews with a dozen West Virginia political figures, is that party labels in the state are fluid. Until recently, West Virginians voted overwhelmingly for Democrats. Now they vote overwhelmingly for Republicans. Despite that, Mr. Manchin has survived and thrived as a Democrat who believes that he can reach all sides.
“All the people he grew up with were Democrats; they’re not anymore, but in his eyes, they haven’t changed — they’re the same people,” said Jonathan Kott, a former top aide to Mr. Manchin in Washington.
Both Mr. Manchin’s father and his grandfather were mayors of Farmington, a hamlet tucked into a seam in the state’s northern mountains. Today, Main Street is anchored by a Family Dollar and the Manchin Clinic, a practice run by a brother of the senator’s. Town Hall has a food drop labeled “Take a Blessing/Leave a Blessing.” The community was the site of a devastating 1968 coal mine explosion that killed 78 men, including one of Mr. Manchin’s uncles.
Another uncle, A. James Manchin, was given a prominent job in state government by Arch Moore Jr., who became governor, further entwining the Manchin and Moore political dynasties, even though they represented different parties.
A. James Manchin was a flamboyant orator and a backslapper, qualities some see echoed in Joe Manchin. Billy Wayne Bailey, a former Democratic state lawmaker, recalled A. James Manchin’s advice on politics: “He said to me, ‘Billy Wayne, if you can’t preach with the preachers and drink with the drunks, you need to find another line of work.’”
Relations between the Manchin and the Moore families embodied a small state’s scratch-my-back alliances. (A. James Manchin was impeached by the Legislature, and Mr. Moore served a prison term on unrelated corruption charges.)
As a young man working for his father’s business, Joe Manchin measured the home of the newly married Shelly Moore Capito for carpeting.
Ms. Capito was the lead Republican negotiator with the White House on its infrastructure plan until Mr. Biden broke off talks this past week, unable to coax Republicans into accepting a big enough package after cutting his first proposal by more than half.
For Democrats hoping that Mr. Manchin will see Republicans as committed to gridlock and that he would be willing to take drastic measures, the senator made clear in The Charleston Gazette-Mail on Sunday that he would never vote to end the legislative filibuster.
In doing so, he most likely doomed the For the People Act, the Democrats’ sweeping bill aimed at countering voting restrictions in Republican-controlled states, which many Democrats see as an existential threat to fair elections and to their party.
Mr. Manchin argued that “partisan policymaking” in Congress on elections “won’t instill confidence in our democracy — it will destroy it.”
“It’s a core belief with Joe that our politics has become too tribal and hyperpartisan, and he looks at his legacy as someone who has been able to get things done, to work with both sides,” said Mike Plante, a Democratic strategist who has advised Mr. Manchin as well as opponents of his.
Mr. Manchin, who is 73, spent 14 years in the Legislature before first seeking statewide office, an ill-fated run for governor in 1996. He lost to a more liberal Democrat in a nasty primary and then refused to support the party’s nominee in the general election (she lost). Chastened by the campaign, Mr. Manchin modified some of his conservative, pro-business positions.
He was elected secretary of state in 2000 and made a second bid for governor — this one successful — in 2004, running as a problem-solver. Once in office, he broke down lines separating some longtime opponents.
Reforming the money-losing workers’ compensation system had been a third rail in West Virginia politics. The state-run program paid generous benefits to workers injured in the state’s dangerous industries — coal, natural gas and timber — but it had $3 billion in unfunded liabilities.
Mr. Manchin, who in private life was successful as a coal brokerbut was elected with the support of labor unions, pushed to privatize insurance and for the coal companies to pay higher taxes.
“Joe found a way to make it work: The state stopped hemorrhaging money, and the unions supported it,” Mr. Plante said.
Meanwhile, West Virginia was shifting against Democrats more rapidly than almost any state in the country. Democrats held all but two of 34 State Senate seats in the early 1990s. Today, Republicans hold supermajorities in both legislative chambers.
Political agility kept Mr. Manchin viable as the state moved so rapidly. He embraced the social conservatism of its white rural electorate — opposing abortion, gun control and federal environmental regulations — while convincing working people that he had their back economically.
The state’s inflection point was 2014. West Virginians took out their anger at President Barack Obama up and down the ballot. The Democratic State Senate majority leader was ousted by a used-car salesman who had not raised a dime. Ms. Capito became the first Republican elected to the U.S. Senate in generations.
The trend accelerated under President Donald J. Trump, who won the state by nearly 40 percentage points in November. Mr. Manchin is the last Democrat in statewide office, and it’s unlikely his party would retain the seat if he retires in 2024.
Protected from a primary threat from the left, he is free to voice objections to progressive policies that other moderate Democrats in the Senate may privately agree with him on but won’t state publicly.
As governor, Mr. Manchin kept a party tent on the lawn of the Executive Mansion for months at a time, inviting a wide array of West Virginians to events — a concrete symbol of the inclusiveness he hoped to promote.
“Joe Manchin has always felt whether you agree with him or not, let’s meet and talk about it,” said Nick Joe Rahall II, a former Democratic congressman from West Virginia. “When he brought people together like that, even people who have publicly lambasted him, they came out of those meetings praising Joe Manchin.”
But Mr. Rahall, who lost his seat in the 2014 G.O.P. wave, is not certain Mr. Manchin’s approach to seeking common ground works anymore in Washington. “I’m not sure it can continue to happen,” he said.
Mr. Manchin occupies the seat previously held by Robert C. Byrd, the longtime Democratic leader who wrote a four-volume history of the Senate.
Mr. Manchin, whose office did not make him available for an interview for this article, often cites Mr. Byrd’s reverence for the institution and its constitutional role to protect small states and minority rights as reasons to insist on bipartisan support for major legislation, such as voting rights reform.
But paradoxically, one law that Mr. Manchin passionately supports, the Affordable Care Act, passed the Senate with only Democratic votes. Mr. Byrd, in the last year of his life, attended midnight sessions of the Senate in a wheelchair to vote for the health care law, which greatly benefited people in West Virginia, whose population is high in poverty and high in illness.
Mr. Rahall recalled that Mr. Manchin, as governor, called to lobby him to pass the health care law when he was one of a few wavering Democrats in the House.
Does that make Mr. Manchin hypocritical about insisting on bipartisan support for voting rights or infrastructure bills?
Fellow Democrats in West Virginia weren’t ready to say so.
One meeting of opposites Mr. Manchin brokered as governor fell outside the realm of public policy. Mr. Manchin cajoled the state’s two major universities, W.V.U. and Marshall, to agree to an annual game.
A history of hard feelings had kept the teams from playing regularly. The first “Friends of Coal Bowl” was played in 2006. The next year, W.V.U. visited its rival’s campus for the first time in 92 years. The W.V.U. Mountaineers won every one of seven matchups. But after 2012, the rivalry fell apart, a victim of athletic mismatch and unmet expectations.
By then, Mr. Manchin was gone from the governor’s office. He was pursuing his dreams of comity in Washington.
PHOTOS: Senator Joe Manchin at a Labor Day event in Marmet, W.Va., in 2018. In a split Senate, he is the Democrats’ most contentious figure. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MADDIE MCGARVEY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Mr. Manchin, second from left, as a state senator in 1988, with George Blackburn Warner Jr., a Republican. Right, at an anti-abortion rally while governor in 2005. In a state where party labels are fluid, he has used political agility to find common ground on both sides. 

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); PARTISANSHIP (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); CONSERVATISM (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); SMALL BUSINESS (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%); GOVERNORS (73%); ATHLETES (71%); ELECTION REFORM (71%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (71%); VOTER REGISTRATION (71%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (70%); CEASEFIRES (60%); Manchin, Joe III (%); West Virginia (%); Senate (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); Law and Legislation (%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Capito, Shelley Moore (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Content Type: Personal Profile (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (93%); JOE MANCHIN (93%); SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO (93%); Manchin, Joe III; Capito, Shelley Moore; Biden, Joseph R Jr
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 18, 2021

 

End of Document
Frustrated but Unbowed, Democrats Reaffirm Resolve for Election Law
The New York Times
June 23, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1207 words
Byline: By Nick Corasaniti
Body




Even as the party's sweeping elections bill was blocked in the Senate, Democrats and civil rights groups reaffirmed their resolve to fight for voting protections in Congress.
For many Democrats and voting rights groups, the failure to advance the party's major elections bill on Tuesday felt like the arrival of the inevitable, the final thud of a tree crashing in the woods after wavering for months. And everyone heard it. 
  Unable to halt the relentless push by Republican state legislatures to pass a host of voting restrictions, many Democrats had rested their hopes on a long-shot bid to enact a federal voting law that would undo much of the G.O.P. legislation and expand access to voting for millions around the country.
  But on Tuesday, as it became increasingly clear that passing federal voting legislation would be a steep challenge, Democrats, civil rights groups and voting rights organizations reaffirmed their resolve to fight in Congress for voting protections.
  ''The pathway is Congress must do their job,'' said Derrick Johnson, the president of the N.A.A.C.P. ''When the Voting Rights Act was adopted in 1965, people thought it was a long shot. It's our jobs as civil rights organizations to make possible what other people think is impossible. We continue to push forward.''
  Though the bill, known as the For the People Act, struggled to garner universal support among Democratic senators, it had been perhaps the ultimate overarching objective for Democrats who have been beaten badly in state legislatures for much of the past two decades, allowing Republicans to draw gerrymandered state legislative districts to hold onto power and move nearly unimpeded in their recent quest to pass new voting laws.
  Some voting rights groups expressed frustration with initial Democratic efforts, arguing that even though the issue was nominally the party's top legislative goal -- as evidenced by its H.R. 1 and S. 1 marking in Congress -- it has not been treated with the requisite urgency. Yet they also hoped that the failed vote on Tuesday would vividly demonstrate the gravity of the situation.
  ''I have yet to see Democrats act like this is the No. 1 priority on their agenda, and I suspect that we will start to see that after today,'' said Nsé Ufot, the chief executive of the New Georgia Project Action Fund, a voting rights group. ''Today is the starter pistol. Today marks the beginning of the escalation.''
  The bill's failure on Tuesday is likely to increase pressure on some Senate Democrats to agree to kill the filibuster in order to pass a voting bill on a party-line vote. Not long after the vote, some progressive groups were already putting Democrats who oppose altering the filibuster in their targets. 
  ''Any Democratic lawmaker who still supports the filibuster is complicit in the voter suppression that we know will happen next year,'' said Ellen Sciales, a spokeswoman for the Sunrise Movement, a progressive group of young climate activists. ''They must realize that voter suppression is just as existential a threat as climate change, because tackling one is inextricable with the other.''
  The blockade of the Democratic legislation in Congress came on the same day that Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas called a special session of the state's Legislature, as Republicans there resumed their attempt to pass an expansive bill of voting restrictions.
  Democratic state lawmakers in Texas -- one of the few major battleground states led by Republicans in which the party has not yet passed a new voting bill -- pledged to keep up their efforts on the ground to stymie the bill, but said that help from Congress would be essential.
  ''We're without a doubt holding the line in Texas,'' said State Representative Trey Martinez Fischer, a Democrat who helped organize the dramatic late-night walkout to stall the previous G.O.P. voting bill last month. ''We're using every tool at our disposal, and we'll continue to do so.''
  But he added, ''It is very clear that the best approach and the best policy is to have a national standard for voting.''
  Mr. Martinez Fischer said the next voting bill in Texas, which Republicans are likely to pass, would remind Americans of the scale of voter restrictions being enacted at the state level.
  Republicans in other states are also moving forward with new voting legislation. On Tuesday, Wisconsin Republicans passed a bill -- certain to be vetoed by Gov. Tony Evers, a Democrat -- that would make absentee voting more difficult, especially for disabled and older people, and would prohibit local election clerks from completing missing information like addresses on the envelopes of absentee ballots.
  The Republican legislation would also forbid ballot collection events more than two weeks before an election, which would end events like the ''Democracy in the Park'' festivities conducted last year by 1,000 poll workers in Madison, the bastion of Wisconsin Democrats.
  Absent the federal law, Democrats and voting rights groups have sought to fight new voting restrictions in both the courts and through traditional campaign tactics.
  Democrats have put forward many legal challenges to the new Republican voting limits, with active lawsuits in Georgia, Florida, Montana, Iowa, Arkansas, New Hampshire, Arizona and Kansas, and more cases likely to be announced.
  The party is also investing more money in expansive efforts in political organizing and voter education, hoping to overcome the likely confusion and suppressive effects that the new voting laws could have in elections in 2021 and 2022.
  Priorities USA, one of the largest liberal super PACs in the country, pledged on Tuesday to spend a minimum of $20 million on voting initiatives, including a large digital campaign that will target voters affected by new legislation and help them navigate the laws.
  And Democrats are looking to use the energy and attention on voting rights this year to help expand their reach in other ways. In Texas this month, the state Democratic Party announced a major $13 million voter registration effort, the largest in party history, with a goal of registering up to two million new Democratic voters.
  Ms. Ufot said her organization was about to embark on the recruitment of civil rights lawyers in Georgia who could help build a protective force for voters and local election officials, who face a greater threat of penalties under part of Georgia's new voting law.
  But passing a federal voting law, no matter the odds, is still the top priority for Democrats and voting rights groups -- not just for future elections, but also for the looming redistricting process.
  ''Time is of the essence. Redistricting starts in just a few weeks, meaning the gerrymandering is starting in two weeks,'' said Michael Waldman, the president of the Brennan Center for Justice, a nonpartisan think tank. He added that simply failing to pass a procedural vote did not signal the end of a federal voting law, but instead simply showed what it would take to pass it.
  ''This is the first collision of this major piece of reform legislation within the Senate,'' Mr. Waldman said. ''And it isn't over today.''
             
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: CIVIL RIGHTS (92%); ELECTION LAW (92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); POLITICS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (73%); EXECUTIVES (67%)
 Organization: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (55%)
 Load-Date: June 23, 2021

 

End of Document
The Looming Fight Over the Right to Cast Ballots
The New York Times
June 24, 2021 Thursday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21; GUEST ESSAY
Length: 1031 words
Byline: By Richard H. Pildes
Body




With the For the People Act on indefinite hold after a filibuster by Republicans in the Senate on Tuesday, the Voting Rights Act is about to return to center stage in Washington. The Supreme Court will soon decide a case on how a crucial part of the landmark law applies to voting laws challenged as racially discriminatory. 
  The country is already roiling with controversies over whether a variety of post-2020 state voting changes reflect legitimate policy concerns or racially discriminatory ones.
  In Congress, Senators Joe Manchin and Lisa Murkowski have turned a spotlight on the Voting Rights Act with their endorsement of a version of the John Lewis Voting Rights Act. It would reaffirm Congress's central role in protecting the right to vote against racially discriminatory changes and give the Justice Department (or, in Mr. Manchin's version, the federal courts) the critical power to approve changes that are legitimate and block those that are invidious.
  The John Lewis Act might well offer the best chance of new national legislation protecting the right to vote in America, and its significance is best seen in historical context, especially that of two Supreme Court cases.
  The John Lewis Act would restore provisions of the Voting Rights Act (Sections 4 and 5) that were effectively invalidated by the 2013 case Shelby County v. Holder. When enacted in 1965, these provisions identified certain parts of the country and put their voting systems under a regime of federal control. These areas had to submit voting changes to the federal government, which had the power to block a proposal if it would diminish minority voter power. The federal government does not normally have veto power over state laws, but Section 5 created one.
  Congress identified those areas based on voting practices in 1964. This coverage formula mainly singled out the states where extensive disenfranchisement had been in effect since the turn of the 20th century -- especially since a Supreme Court case from 1903, Giles v. Harris.
  Plessy v. Ferguson, which had upheld segregation in 1896, is more widely known, but Giles might well be more important. Written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, the majority opinion in Giles contains an extraordinary, chilling passage. The complaint ''imports that the great mass of the white population intends to keep the blacks from voting,'' he wrote. ''Unless we are prepared to supervise the voting in that state by officers of the court, it seems to us that all that the plaintiff could get from equity would be an empty form.'' What is shocking is both the court's brutal realpolitik about the former Confederate states' disenfranchisement of Black voters and its confession of impotence in the face of it.
  Giles was the last gasp in the effort to stop the destruction of voting rights for Black citizens (and many poor white ones) that took place throughout the South from 1890 to 1908. As late as the 1890s, half of adult Black men voted in Southern elections for governor. But with disenfranchisement, the effects were stark. In Louisiana, for example, half of registered voters, more than 130,000 people, were Black in 1896; by 1910, that had fallen to 730 men.
  The court's power to enforce its rulings comes down to the willingness of the other branches to step up and do so. In 1890, Abraham Lincoln's Republican Party withdrew support for a Federal Elections Bill, which signaled Congress's abandonment of its commitment to protect Black voting rights in the South. When Congress finally enacted the Voting Rights Act, it required sending federal officials into parts of the South, as Justice Holmes anticipated, to take over the voter registration process.
  Congress initially designed Section 5 to last for five years; it was renewed for five more years, then seven and, in 1982, for 25 years. In the early renewals, Congress updated the coverage formula to include elections from 1968 and 1972. But later renewals did not update the coverage formula.
  The last time the full Congress considered Section 5 was in 2006. The areas of the country still covered then had not changed much since 1975; indeed, most had been covered since 1965. Still, when experts (including me) testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee in 2006, we urged Congress to update the coverage formula. The failure to do so, we feared, would create a significant risk that the John Roberts-Anthony Kennedy court would hold this part of the Voting Rights Act unconstitutional.
  But Congress had no interest in making those politically charged decisions -- determining whether voting practices were more discriminatory today in Ohio, say, than in Virginia. It left the coverage status quo in place and renewed Section 5 for 25 more years.
  In the Shelby County case, the Supreme Court said that the coverage formula was no longer tied to ''current conditions'' but that Congress could draft an updated formula.
  That is precisely what the John Lewis Act aims to do. A version the House passed in 2019 would cover only those states that have had 15 or more voting-rights violations in the past 25 years (or 10 violations if one was at the state level). Coverage would end after 10 years if the state has a clean record. The period rolls, or continuously moves, so that the act would remain tied to conditions in those time frames.
  The act faces an uphill battle in securing enough Republican votes for passage. But because it is the only legislation with any bipartisan support so far, it might be the most plausible route for now to bolster national voting-rights policy -- and to help bring greater legitimacy to our election process.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: ELECTION LAW (93%); CIVIL RIGHTS (92%); RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); POLITICS (89%); RACE & ETHNICITY (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATION (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); HISTORY (77%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (77%); VETO (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); APPROVALS (68%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (68%)
 Person: JOHN LEWIS (88%); JOE MANCHIN (73%); LISA MURKOWSKI (58%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 24, 2021

 

End of Document
Democrats Vow to Redouble Voting Push: ‘Today Is the Starter Pistol’
The New York Times 
June 22, 2021 Tuesday 06:27 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1218 words
Byline: Nick Corasaniti
Highlight: Even as the party’s sweeping elections bill was blocked in the Senate, Democrats and civil rights groups reaffirmed their resolve to fight for voting protections in Congress.
Body




Even as the party’s sweeping elections bill was blocked in the Senate, Democrats and civil rights groups reaffirmed their resolve to fight for voting protections in Congress.
For many Democrats and voting rights groups, the failure to advance the party’s major elections bill on Tuesday felt like the arrival of the inevitable, the final thud of a tree crashing in the woods after wavering for months. And everyone heard it.
Unable to halt the relentless push by Republican state legislatures to pass a host of voting restrictions, many Democrats had rested their hopes on a long-shot bid to enact a federal voting law that would undo much of the G.O.P. legislation and expand access to voting for millions around the country.
But on Tuesday, as it became increasingly clear that passing federal voting legislation would be a steep challenge, Democrats, civil rights groups and voting rights organizations reaffirmed their resolve to fight in Congress for voting protections.
“The pathway is Congress must do their job,” said Derrick Johnson, the president of the N.A.A.C.P. “When the Voting Rights Act was adopted in 1965, people thought it was a long shot. It’s our jobs as civil rights organizations to make possible what other people think is impossible. We continue to push forward.”
Though the bill, known as the For the People Act, struggled to garner universal support among Democratic senators, it had been perhaps the ultimate overarching objective for Democrats who have been beaten badly in state legislatures for much of the past two decades, allowing Republicans to draw gerrymandered state legislative districts to hold onto power and move nearly unimpeded in their recent quest to pass new voting laws.
Some voting rights groups expressed frustration with initial Democratic efforts, arguing that even though the issue was nominally the party’s top legislative goal — as evidenced by its H.R. 1 and S. 1 marking in Congress — it has not been treated with the requisite urgency. Yet they also hoped that the failed vote on Tuesday would vividly demonstrate the gravity of the situation.
“I have yet to see Democrats act like this is the No. 1 priority on their agenda, and I suspect that we will start to see that after today,” said Nsé Ufot, the chief executive of the New Georgia Project Action Fund, a voting rights group. “Today is the starter pistol. Today marks the beginning of the escalation.”
The bill’s failure on Tuesday is likely to increase pressure on some Senate Democrats to agree to kill the filibuster in order to pass a voting bill on a party-line vote. Not long after the vote, some progressive groups were already putting Democrats who oppose altering the filibuster in their targets. 
“Any Democratic lawmaker who still supports the filibuster is complicit in the voter suppression that we know will happen next year,” said Ellen Sciales, a spokeswoman for the Sunrise Movement, a progressive group of young climate activists. “They must realize that voter suppression is just as existential a threat as climate change, because tackling one is inextricable with the other.”
The blockade of the Democratic legislation in Congress came on the same day that Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas called a special session of the state’s Legislature, as Republicans there resumed their attempt to pass an expansive bill of voting restrictions.
Democratic state lawmakers in Texas — one of the few major battleground states led by Republicans in which the party has not yet passed a new voting bill — pledged to keep up their efforts on the ground to stymie the bill, but said that help from Congress would be essential.
“We’re without a doubt holding the line in Texas,” said State Representative Trey Martinez Fischer, a Democrat who helped organize the dramatic late-night walkout to stall the previous G.O.P. voting bill last month. “We’re using every tool at our disposal, and we’ll continue to do so.”
But he added, “It is very clear that the best approach and the best policy is to have a national standard for voting.”
Mr. Martinez Fischer said the next voting bill in Texas, which Republicans are likely to pass, would remind Americans of the scale of voter restrictions being enacted at the state level.
Republicans in other states are also moving forward with new voting legislation. On Tuesday, Wisconsin Republicans passed a bill — certain to be vetoed by Gov. Tony Evers, a Democrat — that would make absentee voting more difficult, especially for disabled and older people, and would prohibit local election clerks from completing missing information like addresses on the envelopes of absentee ballots.
The Republican legislation would also forbid ballot collection events more than two weeks before an election, which would end events like the “Democracy in the Park” festivities conducted last year by 1,000 poll workers in Madison, the bastion of Wisconsin Democrats.
Absent the federal law, Democrats and voting rights groups have sought to fight new voting restrictions in both the courts and through traditional campaign tactics.
Democrats have put forward many legal challenges to the new Republican voting limits, with active lawsuits in Georgia, Florida, Montana, Iowa, Arkansas, New Hampshire, Arizona and Kansas, and more cases likely to be announced.
The party is also investing more money in expansive efforts in political organizing and voter education, hoping to overcome the likely confusion and suppressive effects that the new voting laws could have in elections in 2021 and 2022.
Priorities USA, one of the largest liberal super PACs in the country, pledged on Tuesday to spend a minimum of $20 million on voting initiatives, including a large digital campaign that will target voters affected by new legislation and help them navigate the laws.
And Democrats are looking to use the energy and attention on voting rights this year to help expand their reach in other ways. In Texas this month, the state Democratic Party announced a major $13 million voter registration effort, the largest in party history, with a goal of registering up to two million new Democratic voters.
Ms. Ufot said her organization was about to embark on the recruitment of civil rights lawyers in Georgia who could help build a protective force for voters and local election officials, who face a greater threat of penalties under part of Georgia’s new voting law.
But passing a federal voting law, no matter the odds, is still the top priority for Democrats and voting rights groups — not just for future elections, but also for the looming redistricting process.
“Time is of the essence. Redistricting starts in just a few weeks, meaning the gerrymandering is starting in two weeks,” said Michael Waldman, the president of the Brennan Center for Justice, a nonpartisan think tank. He added that simply failing to pass a procedural vote did not signal the end of a federal voting law, but instead simply showed what it would take to pass it.
“This is the first collision of this major piece of reform legislation within the Senate,” Mr. Waldman said. “And it isn’t over today.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: CIVIL RIGHTS (94%); ELECTION LAW (92%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); POLITICS (89%); REDISTRICTING (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (72%); EXECUTIVES (67%); Democratic Party (%); Law and Legislation (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); States (US) (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Civil Rights and Liberties (%); Republican Party (%); Texas (%); Senate (%)
 Organization: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (55%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 23, 2021

 

End of Document
Republicans block a sweeping voting rights bill, dealing Biden and Democrats a defeat.
The New York Times 
June 22, 2021 Tuesday 21:03 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 658 words
Byline: Nicholas Fandos
Highlight: President Biden had urged the Senate to pass the bill and “send it to my desk.”
Body




President Biden had urged the Senate to pass the bill and “send it to my desk.”
Republicans on Tuesday blocked the most ambitious voting rights legislation to come before Congress in a generation, dealing a blow to Democrats’ attempts to counter a wave of state-level ballot restrictions and supercharging a campaign to end the legislative filibuster.
President Biden and Democratic leaders said the defeat was only the beginning of their drive to steer federal voting rights legislation into law, and vowed to redouble their efforts in the weeks ahead.
“In the fight for voting rights, this vote was the starting gun, not the finish line,” said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader.
But the Republican blockade in the Senate left Democrats without a clear path forward, and without a means to beat back the restrictive voting laws racing through Republican-led states. For now, it will largely be left to the Justice Department to decide whether to challenge any of the state laws in court — a time-consuming process with limited chances of success — and to a coalition of outside groups to help voters navigate the shifting rules.
Democrats’ best remaining hope to enact legal changes rests on a long-shot bid to eliminate the legislative filibuster, which Republicans used on Tuesday to block the measure, called the For the People Act. Seething progressive activists pointed to the Republicans’ refusal to even allow debate on the issue as a glaring example of why Democrats in the Senate must move to eliminate the rule and bypass the G.O.P. on a range of liberal priorities while they still control Congress and the presidency.
They argued that with former President Donald J. Trump continuing to press the false claim that the election was stolen from him — a narrative that many Republicans have perpetuated as they have pushed for new voting restrictions — Democrats in Congress could not afford to allow the voting bill to languish.
Liberal activists promised a well-funded summertime blitz, replete with home-state rallies and million-dollar ad campaigns, to try to ramp up pressure on a handful of Senate Democrats opposed to changing the rules. Mounting frustration with Republicans could accelerate a growing rift between liberals and more moderate lawmakers over whether to try to pass a bipartisan infrastructure and jobs package or move unilaterally on a far more ambitious plan.
But key Democratic moderates who have defended the filibuster rule — led by Senators Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona — appeared unmoved and said their leaders should try to find narrower bipartisan compromises, including on voting and infrastructure bills.
The Democrats’ voting rights bill would usher in the largest federally mandated expansion of voting rights since the 1960s, ban partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts, force super PACs to disclose their big donors and create a new public campaign financing system.
Republicans never really considered the legislation, or a narrower alternative proposed in recent days by Mr. Manchin. They mounted an aggressive campaign in congressional committees, on television and finally on the Senate floor to portray the bill as a self-serving attempt to federalize elections to benefit Democrats.
“These same rotten proposals have sometimes been called a massive overhaul for a broken democracy, sometimes just a modest package of tweaks for a democracy that’s working perfectly and sometimes a response to state actions, which this bill actually predates by many years,” said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the minority leader. “But whatever label Democrats slap on the bill, the substance remains the same.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (94%); FILIBUSTER (92%); LEGISLATION (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (91%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); BIPARTISANSHIP (89%); ELECTION LAW (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); PARTISANSHIP (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (79%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (53%); Filibusters and Debate Curbs (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Schumer, Charles E (%); Senate (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%)
 Industry: MARKETING & ADVERTISING (72%); MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (71%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (93%); CHARLES SCHUMER (88%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); KYRSTEN SINEMA (79%); JOE MANCHIN (78%); Manchin, Joe III; Schumer, Charles E; Biden, Joseph R Jr
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%)
 Load-Date: June 22, 2021

 

End of Document
Democratic Group Will Pour $20 Million Into Voting Rights Efforts
The New York Times 
June 22, 2021 Tuesday 08:02 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 765 words
Byline: Nick Corasaniti
Highlight: Priorities USA, one of the largest liberal super PACs, is hoping to counteract Republican-driven voting restrictions through both digital ad campaigns and legal efforts.
Body




Priorities USA, one of the largest liberal super PACs, is hoping to counteract Republican-driven voting restrictions through both digital ad campaigns and legal efforts.
Priorities USA, one of the biggest Democratic super PACs, announced on Tuesday that it would pump $20 million into voting rights initiatives ahead of the 2022 election cycle, aiming to combat Republican-led election laws with digital ads and organizing as well as in the courts.
The digital effort will include a series of extensive voter information campaigns, going beyond a more traditional approach that would consist solely of persuasion ads. The group’s overall goal is to help people navigate a new balloting landscape created by the many new restrictions passed by Republicans in at least 16 states. The campaigns will also provide voting tools like text message reminders to register to vote or request an absentee ballot.
“The purpose of this program is to really center the voters who we know are particularly targeted by the Republicans’ suppression efforts,” said Danielle Butterfield, the executive director of Priorities USA. “Those are voters of color, Black and Latino voters specifically, and we plan to center them both in our creative and our targeting to make sure that they are aware of how empowering voting is.”
The other significant investment will be on the legal front, where the group has served as one of the leading litigators in voting lawsuits across the country. Priorities USA joined lawsuits in 10 states during the 2020 election and its aftermath, squaring off against legal attempts by Donald J. Trump’s campaign to overturn the election results and pushing back on new voting laws. Though Priorities has not sued any state this year in response to new voting restrictions, group officials said that more legal efforts would be coming soon.
The initial $20 million investment from Priorities comes as Democrats across the country are struggling to fight back against the Republican push to restrict voting. Opposition from major corporations, faith groups, civil rights groups and celebrities has done little to stymie new voting laws in key states like Georgia, Florida, Iowa and Arizona. Even a dramatic late-night walkout by Democrats in Texas, which effectively killed a Republican voting bill in the state, is likely to be only a temporary victory, with the governor pledging to enact new voting legislation through a special session of the Legislature.
The Supreme Court is also poised to deliver a ruling in the coming days on the Voting Rights Act, potentially further weakening its protections against voting restrictions. And Democrats in Washington appear to be on the brink of a defeat of their expansive federal voting bill, the For the People Act, with Republicans united in opposition and moderate Democrats unwilling to kill the filibuster to pass the legislation.
Of course, the new laws will continue to make it harder for some people to vote, and voter education and awareness efforts can go only so far. Priorities USA said it would continue to explore other avenues to help people vote.
“Most voting rights advocates and people that do this work would say that we don’t need to try to narrow it down to just one area of work,” said Aneesa S. McMillan, a deputy executive director at Priorities USA who oversees voting rights efforts. “We need to be thinking of a multipronged approach.”
Organizing campaigns are becoming an increasingly popular tool for Democrats to try to counteract new voting laws. This month, the Texas Democratic Party announced the largest voter registration push in its history, aiming to register two million new voters and investing about $14 million in the effort.
In addition to informing voters, an important component of the digital effort by Priorities USA will be fighting voting disinformation.
“We want to make sure that we are doing our part to clarify and break through all the misinformation and disinformation, which is how voter suppression thrives,” Ms. McMillan said.
Officials at Priorities USA said that they expected the group’s initial $20 million investment to grow substantially, but that setting aside the current budget now was crucial to the effort.
“We’re starting this conversation early because we want to make sure we raise the alarm bells early about how much work needs to be done to respond to these Republican efforts,” Ms. Butterfield said.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES (90%); POLITICAL ADVERTISING (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); ELECTION LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); POLITICS (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); BALLOTS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT HISTORY (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (73%); CONTESTED ELECTIONS (73%); FILIBUSTER (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); Priorities USA (%); Democratic Party (%); Political Advertising (%); Political Action Committees (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Law and Legislation (%); United States Politics and Government (%)
 Industry: MARKETING & ADVERTISING (91%); MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (90%); POLITICAL ADVERTISING (90%); TEXT MESSAGING (54%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: July 12, 2021

 

End of Document
The Really Big Fight on Voting Rights Is Just Around the Corner; Guest Essay
The New York Times 
June 22, 2021 Tuesday 00:03 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1033 words
Byline: Richard H. Pildes
Highlight: The John Lewis Act would reaffirm Congress’s central role in protecting the right to vote against racially discriminatory changes.
Body




With the For the People Act on indefinite hold after a filibuster by Republicans in the Senate on Tuesday, the Voting Rights Act is about to return to center stage in Washington. The Supreme Court will soon decide a case on how a crucial part of the landmark law applies to voting laws challenged as racially discriminatory.
The country is already roiling with controversies over whether a variety of post-2020 state voting changes reflect legitimate policy concerns or racially discriminatory ones.
In Congress, Senators Joe Manchin and Lisa Murkowski have turned a spotlight on the Voting Rights Act with their endorsement of a version of the John Lewis Voting Rights Act. It would reaffirm Congress’s central role in protecting the right to vote against racially discriminatory changes and give the Justice Department (or, in Mr. Manchin’s version, the federal courts) the critical power to approve changes that are legitimate and block those that are invidious.
The John Lewis Act might well offer the best chance of new national legislation protecting the right to vote in America, and its significance is best seen in historical context, especially that of two Supreme Court cases.
The John Lewis Act would restore provisions of the Voting Rights Act (Sections 4 and 5) that were effectively invalidated by the 2013 case Shelby County v. Holder. When enacted in 1965, these provisions identified certain parts of the country and put their voting systems under a regime of federal control. These areas had to submit voting changes to the federal government, which had the power to block a proposal if it would diminish minority voter power. The federal government does not normally have veto power over state laws, but Section 5 created one.
Congress identified those areas based on voting practices in 1964. This coverage formula mainly singled out the states where extensive disenfranchisement had been in effect since the turn of the 20th century — especially since a Supreme Court case from 1903, Giles v. Harris.
Plessy v. Ferguson, which had upheld segregation in 1896, is more widely known, but Giles might well be more important. Written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, the majority opinion in Giles contains an extraordinary, chilling passage. The complaint “imports that the great mass of the white population intends to keep the blacks from voting,” he wrote. “Unless we are prepared to supervise the voting in that state by officers of the court, it seems to us that all that the plaintiff could get from equity would be an empty form.” What is shocking is both the court’s brutal realpolitik about the former Confederate states’ disenfranchisement of Black voters and its confession of impotence in the face of it.
Giles was the last gasp in the effort to stop the destruction of voting rights for Black citizens (and many poor white ones) that took place throughout the South from 1890 to 1908. As late as the 1890s, half of adult Black men voted in Southern elections for governor. But with disenfranchisement, the effects were stark. In Louisiana, for example, half of registered voters, more than 130,000 people, were Black in 1896; by 1910, that had fallen to 730 men.
The court’s power to enforce its rulings comes down to the willingness of the other branches to step up and do so. In 1890, Abraham Lincoln’s Republican Party withdrew support for a Federal Elections Bill, which signaled Congress’s abandonment of its commitment to protect Black voting rights in the South. When Congress finally enacted the Voting Rights Act, it required sending federal officials into parts of the South, as Justice Holmes anticipated, to take over the voter registration process.
Congress initially designed Section 5 to last for five years; it was renewed for five more years, then seven and, in 1982, for 25 years. In the early renewals, Congress updated the coverage formula to include elections from 1968 and 1972. But later renewals did not update the coverage formula.
The last time the full Congress considered Section 5 was in 2006. The areas of the country still covered then had not changed much since 1975; indeed, most had been covered since 1965. Still, when experts (including me) testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee in 2006, we urged Congress to update the coverage formula. The failure to do so, we feared, would create a significant risk that the John Roberts-Anthony Kennedy court would hold this part of the Voting Rights Act unconstitutional.
But Congress had no interest in making those politically charged decisions — determining whether voting practices were more discriminatory today in Ohio, say, than in Virginia. It left the coverage status quo in place and renewed Section 5 for 25 more years.
In the Shelby County case, the Supreme Court said that the coverage formula was no longer tied to “current conditions” but that Congress could draft an updated formula.
That is precisely what the John Lewis Act aims to do. A version the House passed in 2019 would cover only those states that have had 15 or more voting-rights violations in the past 25 years (or 10 violations if one was at the state level). Coverage would end after 10 years if the state has a clean record. The period rolls, or continuously moves, so that the act would remain tied to conditions in those time frames.
The act faces an uphill battle in securing enough Republican votes for passage. But because it is the only legislation with any bipartisan support so far, it might be the most plausible route for now to bolster national voting-rights policy — and to help bring greater legitimacy to our election process.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: ELECTION LAW (94%); RIGHT TO VOTE (94%); CIVIL RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (92%); DISCRIMINATION (91%); FILIBUSTER (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); RACE & ETHNICITY (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATION (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); HISTORY (77%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (77%); VETO (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); APPROVALS (69%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (69%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Discrimination (%); Federal-State Relations (US) (%); Republican Party (%); Senate (%); Supreme Court (US) (%); Holmes, Oliver Wendell Jr (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Roberts, John G Jr (%); Lewis, John R (%); Southern States (US) (%)
 Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (56%)
 Person: JOHN LEWIS (92%); JOHN ROBERTS (92%); JOE MANCHIN (88%); LISA MURKOWSKI (58%); Holmes, Oliver Wendell Jr; Manchin, Joe III; Roberts, John G Jr; Lewis, John R
 Geographic: SOUTHEAST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 24, 2021

 

End of Document
Stop Hoping the G.O.P. Will Play Ball; Charles M. Blow
The New York Times 
June 20, 2021 Sunday 23:34 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 949 words
Byline: Charles M. Blow
Highlight: Democrats are playing an honor game; Republicans are playing an endgame.
Body




I am truly baffled as to why Democrats continue to search for bipartisan support that has not only been illusory, but nonexistent — with the exception of a predictable few and only on a few issues with them.
Democrats: Republicans don’t want you to win. It’s that simple. They want no successes on your watch, and they certainly don’t want to participate in said victories.
And yet the reports keep pouring in of Democrats bending over backward and gutting their bills in a desperate effort to win Republican support.
It seems to me that this has all been a performance, a going through the motions, a checking of the boxes, so that Democrats could say that they tried, that they extended a hand but were rebuffed. Democrats always seem to want to win the moral advantage, to say that they played the game with honor.
But that is meaningless when Republicans no longer care about that form of morality, when they no longer want to play the game by the established rules at all. Democrats are playing an honor game; Republicans are playing an endgame.
Republicans are in win-at-all-costs mode. They don’t really care how they sound today or will be judged by history. The only thing that matters is winning and retaining power, defending the narrative of America that white people created and protecting the power and wealth they accrued because of it.
As The Washington Post reported Sunday, “the Equality Act, which would add sexual orientation and gender identity to the protected classes of the 1964 Civil Rights Act alongside race, color, religion and national origin,” has stalled because of “sharpening Republican rhetoric, one key Democrat’s insistence on bipartisanship, and the Senate’s 60-vote supermajority rule.”
Last week, Senator Joe Manchin offered some changes and reductions to the voter rights bill called the For the People Act, changes that he could support and that he hoped would win some Republican support. His compromised stance was quickly rebuffed by Republicans. Manchin had also offered alterations to the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, which seeks to restore parts of the Voting Rights Act.
But, asTalking Points Memowrote, Manchin’s changes would basically gut the bill. As T.P.M. put it, “One of those proposed changes would decrease the attorney general’s ability to deem a voting practice discriminatory without a judicial finding.”
Politico reported on Friday that the White House will lean more on the bully pulpit as its voting rights bills grind to a halt. This includes engaging the public more, partnering with corporations and leaning on the Justice Department to challenge some state laws.
Politico is also reporting that Democrats are preemptively scaling back gun control legislation — pre-emptively taking the compromise position — to avoid a Republican roadblock that will most likely still remain. According to Politico:
“Democrats are preparing to vote on a scaled-down guns bill — most likely a curtailed plan to boost background checks for firearm buyers. The goal is to unite the party and pick up a limited number of Republican votes, even as their effort appears headed towards the same doomed fate as previous proposals to curb gun violence.”
Rather than continuing to peddle a false optimism that bipartisanship on most major legislation is truly possible with this Republican Party, Democrats need to tell their voters some uncomfortable truths.
First, the obvious: Even though Democrats have control of the House and Senate, not everyone in this caucus is fully committed to a liberal policy agenda. That means that the moderates, like Manchin, are the de facto leaders of the Democratic majority. Nothing passes without their approval.
It is these very same moderates who stand in the way of eliminating the filibuster.
And it is precisely for those reasons that very little is likely to get passed through this Senate that liberals will find satisfying. Democrats must brace for massive disappointment.
Furthermore, we are barreling toward midterm elections in which Republicans are optimistic about winning back the House and possibly the Senate.
I say dispense with the phony, wish-driven narrative Democrats are selling. Go down screaming and fighting. Much of the Democratic agenda may be stalled, but never stop reminding voters why it is: not because Democrats haven’t compromised enough, but because they could never compromise enough.
The current status quo is an unwinnable negotiation, because it isn’t a negotiation. This is a war. And in it, all is fair. Republicans have embraced a liar and racist in Donald Trump because their voters embraced him. They have excused and multiplied, in fantastical ways, the insurrection at the Capitol. They are rushing to write voter restrictions that also give them more say over how results are verified.
In the face of all this, Democrats need to stop talking about reaching across the aisle, compromise and common ground.
They need to go on the record and speak plainly: The Republican Party has given up on the idea of a true and full democracy. They are attempting to tear it down and erect in its place a system that reduces voter rolls and skews the will of the American people.
For the Republican Party, the success of democracy — that growing numbers of people could participate — is its failure.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); HOLDING COMPANIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PUBLISHING SECTOR PERFORMANCE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); ELECTION LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); POLITICS (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); GUN CONTROL (78%); LGBTQ+ PERSONS (78%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); GENDER IDENTITY (64%); ALLIANCES & PARTNERSHIPS (50%); RELIGION (50%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Law and Legislation (%); House of Representatives (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); Senate (%); Manchin, Joe III (%)
 Company:  GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (54%)
 Ticker: GHC (NYSE) (54%)
 Industry: NAICS517311 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (54%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (54%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (54%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (54%); PERIODICAL PUBLISHING (90%); PUBLISHING SECTOR PERFORMANCE (90%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (77%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (77%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS (72%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS (72%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (72%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (89%); JOHN LEWIS (58%); Manchin, Joe III
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 20, 2021

 

End of Document
Lessons from the Demise of a Voting Rights Bill
The New York Times 
June 23, 2021 Wednesday 06:00 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: PODCASTS; the-daily
Length: 345 words
Highlight: A sweeping election overhaul bill was blocked in the Senate. What does its failure teach us about the fate of other Democratic priorities and future of voting rights?
Body




Listen and follow The Daily
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Stitcher
It would have been the most sweeping expansion of voting rights in a generation.
The For the People Act, a bill created by House Democrats after the 2018 midterms, was huge. Its roughly 800 pages touched on every aspect of the electoral process.
The bill sought to eliminate voter ID laws and partisan gerrymandering, return the franchise to millions of felons and bring in automatic voter registration.
On Tuesday night, however, Senate Republicans filibustered the bill before it could even be debated, essentially leaving it for dead.
What lessons can we take from its demise?
On today’s episode
Background reading
•	By blocking the sweeping voting rights bill, Republicans dealt a blow to Democrats’ attempts to counter a wave of state-level ballot restrictions, while also supercharging a campaign to end the legislative filibuster.
•	In the wake of the bill’s demise, Democrats and civil rights groups have reaffirmed their resolve to fight for voting protections in Congress.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (92%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); ELECTION LAW (90%); FILIBUSTER (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (72%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (71%); FELONIES (71%); audio-neutral-informative (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Law and Legislation (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Democratic Party (%); House of Representatives (%); Republican Party (%); Senate (%)
 Industry: PODCASTING (90%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 23, 2021

 

End of Document
G.O.P. Shrugs at Signs Of Democracy in Peril
The New York Times
June 15, 2021 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11; NEWS ANALYSIS
Length: 1755 words
Byline: By Jonathan Weisman
Body




As G.O.P. legislatures move to curtail voting rules, congressional Democrats say authoritarianism looms, but Republicans dismiss the concerns as politics as usual.
WASHINGTON -- Senator Christopher S. Murphy concedes that political rhetoric in the nation's capital can sometimes stray into hysteria, but when it comes to the precarious state of American democracy, he insisted he was not exaggerating the nation's tilt toward authoritarianism. 
  ''Democrats are always at risk of being hyperbolic,'' said Mr. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut. ''I don't think there's a risk when it comes to the current state of democratic norms.''
  After the norm-shattering presidency of Donald J. Trump, the violence-inducing bombast over a stolen election, the pressuring of state vote counters, the Capitol riot and the flood of voter curtailment laws rapidly being enacted in Republican-run states, Washington has found itself in an anguished state.
  Almost daily, Democrats warn that Republicans are pursuing racist, Jim Crow-inspired voter suppression efforts to disenfranchise tens of millions of citizens, mainly people of color, in a cynical effort to grab power. Metal detectors sit outside the House chamber to prevent lawmakers -- particularly Republicans who have boasted of their intention to carry guns everywhere -- from bringing weaponry to the floor. Democrats regard their Republican colleagues with suspicion, believing that some of them collaborated with the rioters on Jan. 6.
  Republican lawmakers have systematically downplayed or dismissed the dangers, with some breezing over the attack on the Capitol as a largely peaceful protest, and many saying the state voting law changes are to restore ''integrity'' to the process, even as they give credence to Mr. Trump's false claims of rampant fraud in the 2020 election.
  They shrug off Democrats' warnings of grave danger as the overheated language of politics as usual.
  ''I haven't understood for four or five years why we are so quick to spin into a place where part of the country is sure that we no longer have the strength to move forward, as we always have in the past,'' said Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri, a member of Republican leadership, noting that the passions of Republican voters today match those of Democratic voters after Mr. Trump's triumph. ''Four years ago, there were people in the so-called resistance showing up in all of my offices every week, some of whom were chaining themselves to the door.''
  For Democrats, the evidence of looming catastrophe mounts daily. Fourteen states, including politically competitive ones like Florida and Georgia, have enacted 22 laws to curtail early and mail-in ballots, limit polling places and empower partisans to police polling, then oversee the vote tally. Others are likely to follow, including Texas, with its huge share of House seats and electoral votes.
  Because Republicans control the legislatures of many states where the 2020 census will force redistricting, the party is already in a strong position to erase the Democrats' razor-thin majority in the House. Even moderate voting-law changes could bolster Republicans' chances for the net gain of one vote they need to take back the Senate.
  And in the nightmare outcome promulgated by some academics, Republicans have put themselves in a position to dictate the outcome of the 2024 presidential election if the voting is close in swing states.
  ''Statutory changes in large key electoral battleground states are dangerously politicizing the process of electoral administration, with Republican-controlled legislatures giving themselves the power to override electoral outcomes on unproven allegations,'' 188 scholars said in a statement expressing concern about the erosion of democracy.
  Senator Angus King, an independent from Maine who lectured on American politics at Bowdoin College before going to the Senate, put the moment in historical context. He called American democracy ''a 240-year experiment that runs against the tide of human history,'' and that tide usually leads from and back to authoritarianism.
  He said he feared the empowerment of state legislatures to decide election results more than the troubling curtailments of the franchise.
  ''This is an incredibly dangerous moment, and I don't think it's being sufficiently realized as such,'' he said.
  Republicans contend that much of this is overblown, though some concede the charges sting. Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, said Democrats were playing a hateful race card to promote voting-rights legislation that is so extreme it would cement Democratic control of Congress for decades.
  ''I hope that damage isn't being done,'' he added, ''but it is always very dangerous to falsely play the race card and let's face it, that's what's being done here.''
  Mr. Toomey, who voted to convict Mr. Trump at his second impeachment trial, said he understood why, in the middle of a deadly pandemic, states sharply liberalized voting rules in 2020, extending mail-in voting, allowing mailed ballots to be counted days after Election Day and setting up ballot drop boxes, curbside polls and weeks of early voting.
  But he added that Democrats should understand why state election officials wanted to course correct now that the coronavirus was ebbing.
  ''Every state needs to strike a balance between two competing values: making it as easy as possible to cast legitimate votes, but also the other, which is equally important: having everybody confident about the authenticity of the votes,'' Mr. Toomey said.
  Mr. Trump's lies about a stolen election, he added, ''were more likely to resonate because you had this system that went so far the other way.''
  Some other Republicans embrace the notion that they are trying to use their prerogatives as a minority party to safeguard their own power. Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky said the endeavor was the essence of America's system of representative democracy, distinguishing it from direct democracy, where the majority rules and is free to trample the rights of the minority unimpeded.
  ''The idea of democracy and majority rule really is what goes against our history and what the country stands for,'' Mr. Paul said. ''The Jim Crow laws came out of democracy. That's what you get when a majority ignores the rights of others.''
  Democrats and their allies push back hard on those arguments. Mr. King said the only reason voters lacked confidence in the voting system was that Republicans -- especially Mr. Trump -- told them for months that it was rigged, despite all evidence to the contrary, and now continued to insist that there were abuses in the process that must be fixed.
  ''That's like pleading for mercy as an orphan after you killed both your parents,'' he said.
  Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, said in no way could some of the new state voting laws be seen as a necessary course correction. ''Not being able to serve somebody water who's waiting in line? I mean, come on,'' he said. ''There are elements that are in most of these proposals where you look at it and you say, 'That violates the common-sense test.'''
  Missteps by Democrats have fortified Republicans' attempts to downplay the dangers. Some of them, including President Biden, have mischaracterized Georgia's voting law, handing Republicans ammunition to say that Democrats were willfully distorting what was happening at the state level.
  The state's 98-page voting law, passed after the narrow victories for Mr. Biden and two Democratic candidates for Senate, would make absentee voting harder and create restrictions and complications for millions of voters, many of them people of color.
  But Mr. Biden falsely claimed that the law -- which he labeled ''un-American'' and ''sick'' -- had slapped new restrictions on early voting to bar people from voting after 5 p.m. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, said the Georgia law had ended early voting on Sunday. It didn't.
  And the sweep -- critics say overreach -- of the Democrats' answer to Republican voter laws, the For the People Act, has undermined Democratic claims that the fate of the republic relies on its passage. Even some Democrats are uncomfortable with the act's breadth, including an advancement of statehood for the District of Columbia with its assurance of two more senators, almost certainly Democratic; its public financing of elections; its nullification of most voter identification laws; and its mandatory prescriptions for early and mail-in voting.
  ''They want to put a thumb on the scale of future elections,'' Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, said on Wednesday. ''They want to take power away from the voters and the states, and give themselves every partisan advantage that they can.''
  Senator Mitt Romney, Republican of Utah, who could conceivably be a partner in Democratic efforts to expand voting rights, called the legislation a ''fundamentally unserious'' bill.
  Republican leaders have sought to take the current argument from the lofty heights of history to the nitty-gritty of legislation. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader, pointed to the success of bipartisan efforts such as passage of a bill to combat hate crimes against Asian Americans, approval of a broad China competition measure and current talks to forge compromises on infrastructure and criminal justice as proof that Democratic catastrophizing over the state of American governance was overblown.
  But Democrats are not assuaged.
  ''Not to diminish the importance of the work we've done here, but democracy itself is what we're talking about,'' said Senator Brian Schatz of Hawaii. ''And to point at other bills that don't have to do with the fair administration of elections is just an attempt to distract while all these state legislatures move systematically toward disenfranchising voters who have historically leaned Democrat.''
  Mr. King said he had had serious conversations with Republican colleagues about the precarious state of American democracy. Authoritarian leaders like Vladimir V. Putin, Viktor Orban and Adolf Hitler have come to power by election, and stayed in power by warping or obliterating democratic norms.
  But, he acknowledged, he has yet to get serious engagement, largely because his colleagues fear the wrath of Mr. Trump and his supporters.
  ''I get the feeling they hope this whole thing will go away,'' he said. ''They make arguments, but you have the feeling their hearts aren't in it.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); ELECTION LAW (89%); 2021 US CAPITOL RIOTS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); US ELECTORAL COLLEGE (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); RIOTS (74%); ELECTION FRAUD (73%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); MAIL-IN VOTING (73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (72%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (69%); RACE & ETHNICITY (67%); METAL DETECTORS (66%)
 Industry: METAL DETECTORS (66%)
 Person: CHRISTOPHER S MURPHY (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); ROY BLUNT (58%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); MISSOURI, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: June 15, 2021

 

End of Document
Opposing Efforts at Voting Reform; letters
The New York Times 
June 15, 2021 Tuesday 23:33 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; letters
Length: 1041 words
Highlight: Readers criticize Republican moves to tighten voting laws. Also: A day off to vote; expats and taxes; the "queer" label; a Central Park concert; mental health care.
Body




To the Editor:
Re “Joe Manchin Has a Point About Voting Reform” (Opinion guest essay, June 12):
Christopher Caldwell’s attack on the For the People Act and other attempts to allow as many citizens as possible access to the ballot boils down to this: The simpler the election, the more it will be trusted; the more complicated an election, the more prone to chicanery and fraud.
He neglects to note that in the last presidential election we had just the kind of apparatus he criticizes: mail-in voting, absentee voting, early voting, late vote counting, curbside voting, drop boxes, harvesting and all the rest. Yet Mr. Trump’s director of cybersecurity at the Department of Homeland Security, Christopher Krebs, said the election was “the most secure in American history.”
This unpleasant fact undermines Mr. Caldwell’s folderol.
Leslie Epstein
Brookline, Mass.
To the Editor:
Christopher Caldwell writes, “Absent a pandemic, there is a coherent case that there should never be absentee or mail-in balloting.” Oh, really? Tell that to all those people living in nursing homes or who are shut in and cannot physically get to a polling place. Tell that to the millions of college students who have classes on Tuesdays and simply cannot get home to vote in person. And tell that to all the members of our military who are currently serving overseas to protect our right to vote.
Ann Galler
Garrison, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Republican efforts to pass voting restrictions might make sense if Republicans lost most of their elections in 2020, but in fact they made gains in the House and won eight out of 11 contests for governor. Making voting more accessible and easier for all is the only bipartisan strategy!
Sue Marcus
Springfield, N.J.
Businesses Should Give Workers a Day Off to Vote
To the Editor:
I call on all businesses to give their workers the day off to vote. This action is clearly within the rights of every business. Those businesses that cannot afford to give a full day should give half their workers the morning off and the other half the afternoon off.
All business owners who claim to support democracy should take this step. We do not need the permission of the federal government or the state governments. We do not have to wait while the legislatures endlessly propose, debate, maneuver and delay. Do it now!
Franklin Lindblom
East Lansing, Mich.
Expats but Not Fat Cats
To the Editor:
Re “We Ran the Treasury Department. This Is How to Fix Tax Evasion.” (Opinion guest essay, nytimes.com, June 9):
The five former Treasury secretaries are right to raise the importance of new funding for scrutiny of the complex tax returns of high earners whose noncompliance results in the greatest loss of tax revenue. But millions of middle-class Americans are forced to file complex returns because of the tax system’s unfair impact on U.S. citizens abroad.
While overseas Americans are often incorrectly viewed as fat cats stashing money in tax shelters, our research showsthat they are actually overwhelmingly middle class. In addition to being asked to pay taxes in the United States as well as our country of residence (something almost no other country inflicts on its expatriates), Americans abroad must follow excruciatingly complicated tax filing procedures. This can result in tax noncompliance simply because the process is too complex for the average overseas American who can’t afford to hire tax preparers.
Democrats Abroad supports additional funding for the I.R.S. and fair tax enforcement, but we ask that lawmakers not put the minnows in the same tank as the sharks. The vast majority of overseas Americans should be treated as the middle-class earners that they are.
Carmelan Polce
Sydney, Australia
The writer is chair of the Democrats Abroad Taxation Task Force.
Don’t Call Me ‘Queer’
To the Editor:
Re “My Own Journey to Pride” (column, June 7):
As Charles M. Blow briefly noted, there are huge generational differences in usage of identifiers like “queer.” As a 76-year-old who came out in my mid-60s, I am of the generation that experienced the use of queer to ridicule, wound and demonize.
I have resisted labeling myself as such, even after queer became de rigueur among some of my university colleagues. As Alphonso David makes clear in “Why the Latest Republican Assault on L.G.B.T.Q. Rights Is Different” (Opinion guest essay, nytimes.com, June 7), there are still plenty of politicians (and pastors) who push homophobic legislation, and they often weaponize terms like queer. So count me out of the queer reclamation camp.
And by the way, many gay folks of my generation cannot abide the ever-expanding L.G.B.T.Q.I.A.+++ alphabet soup that has become the most widely accepted way of identifying our community. What was wrong with “gay”?
Wayne A. Cornelius
Portland, Ore.
The writer is professor emeritus of political science at University of California San Diego.
Money for a Central Park Concert?
To the Editor:
Re “Turning the Page With a Central Park Concert” (Arts pages, June 8):
“I can’t think of a better place than the Great Lawn of Central Park to be the place where you say that New York is reopening,” says the impresario of the planned concert.
I can think of a great many places: the cultural institutions that are still on life support as the pandemic wanes. The public funds allocated for this extravaganza would provide longer-lasting benefits if they were distributed among the city’s many performing arts groups, museums and architectural treasures.
Thomas Fedorek
New York
It’s Hard to Get Mental Health Care
To the Editor:
Re “Signs That It’s Time for Therapy” (Here to Help, May 23):
I don’t know whether to laugh or cry when I read news articles, opinion pieces and letters to the editor about how important it is for people to recognize the symptoms of mental illness and get treatment for it.
The reason for my reaction is that many people writing these pieces have absolutely no idea how difficult it is for some people to actually get treatment for mental illness.
In my experience in Iowa, many mental health care providers will not accept Medicare, and if they do accept Medicare, they won’t accept Medicaid.
This reality needs to be reported in depth.
Gary Sanders
Iowa City

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Letter
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (94%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); ELECTION REFORM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MAIL-IN VOTING (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); TAX FRAUD (89%); TAXES & TAXATION (89%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); VIRUSES (89%); BALLOTS (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); ELECTION LAW (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); RIGHT TO VOTE (78%); TAX LAW (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (77%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (77%); TAX CONSULTING (77%); TAX PREPARATION SERVICES (77%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (77%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); HISTORY (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (69%); UPPER INCOME PERSONS (67%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (66%); MIDDLE INCOME PERSONS (60%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voting and Voters (%); Americans Abroad (%); Tax Preparers and Preparation (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Culture (Arts) (%); Mental Health and Disorders (%); Coronavirus Reopenings (%)
 Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)
 Industry: TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (89%); NURSING & RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES (77%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (77%); TAX CONSULTING (77%); TAX PREPARATION SERVICES (77%); LONG TERM HEALTH CARE (72%); NURSING HOMES (72%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (69%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (58%)
 Geographic: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: June 15, 2021

 

End of Document
Texas Democrats Stymie G.O.P. Voting Bill, for Now
The New York Times 
May 31, 2021 Monday 14:22 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1868 words
Byline: Nick Corasaniti
Highlight: Republicans hit a significant stumbling block in their push to enact some of the strictest voting laws in the nation. But they could yet pass the measures through a special session of the Legislature.
Body




Republicans hit a significant stumbling block in their push to enact some of the strictest voting laws in the nation. But they could yet pass the measures through a special session of the Legislature.
Democrats in the Texas Legislature staged a dramatic, late-night walkout on Sunday night to force the failure of a sweeping Republican overhaul of state election laws. The move, which deprived the session of the minimum number of lawmakers required for a vote before a midnight deadline, was a stunning setback for state Republicans who had made a new voting law one of their top priorities. 
The effort is not entirely dead, however. Gov. Greg Abbott, a Republican, indicated that he would call a special session of the Legislature, which could start as early as June 1, or Tuesday, to restart the process. The governor has said that he strongly supported an election bill, and in a statement he called the failure to reach one on Sunday “deeply disappointing.” He was widely expected to sign whatever measure Republicans passed. 
“Election Integrity &amp; Bail Reform were emergency items for this legislative session,” Mr. Abbott said on Twitter on Sunday night. “They will be added to the special session agenda.” He did not specify when the session would start. 
While Republicans would still be favored to pass a bill in a special session, the unexpected turn of events on Sunday presents a new hurdle in their push to enact a far-reaching election law that would install some of the most rigid voting restrictions in the country, and cement the state as one of the hardest in which to cast a ballot. 
The final bill, known as S.B. 7, included new restrictions on absentee voting; granted broad new autonomy and authority to partisan poll watchers; escalated punishments for mistakes or offenses by election officials; and banned both drive-through voting and 24-hour voting, which were used for the first time during the 2020 election in Harris County, home to Houston and a growing number of the state’s Democratic voters. 
Republicans’ inability to pass the measure on Sunday night was the first major stumble for the party in its monthslong drive to restrict voting across the nation, and an embarrassment for G.O.P. leaders in the Texas Legislature who at least momentarily fell short of a top legislative goal for both the governor and the Republican Party.
After a lengthy debate in the State House of Representatives in which Democrats raised numerous objections, staged lengthy question-and-answer sessions and leveraged procedural maneuvers, Democrats departed en masse, leaving the chamber roughly 14 members short of the required 100-member quorum to continue business. Without the requisite number of legislators, Dade Phelan, the speaker of the State House, adjourned the session around 11 p.m. local time, effectively killing the bill for this legislative session. 
The Democratic flight was sparked by State Representative Chris Turner, the party’s caucus chair in the House, who sent a text message to members at 10:35 p.m. local time.
“Members, take your key and leave the chamber discreetly,” Mr. Turner wrote. “Do not go to the gallery. Leave the building. ~ Chris”
In a statement early Monday, Mr. Turner said the walkout had been a last resort. 
“It became obvious Republicans were going to cut off debate to ram through their vote suppression legislation,” he said. “At that point, we had no choice but to take extraordinary measures to protect our constituents and their right to vote.”
Early Monday, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, a Republican, lashed out at his House colleagues and indirectly criticized the Republican leadership in the House, saying in a statement that it had “failed the people of Texas tonight. No excuse.”
If Mr. Abbott calls a special session, Republican legislators would have to start from scratch, but it is possible that they could simply use the same language and provisions from S.B. 7, or even introduce a bill with more strident restrictions on voting access.  
From the outset, the push to install new restrictions on voting in Texas has been upended by legislative missteps and tension among Republicans in the State Capitol, marked by multiple late-night voting sessions in both chambers. After two different versions of the bill were passed by the House and the Senate, legislators took the bill behind closed doors to hash out a final version in a panel known as a conference committee. 
The conference committee took more than a week to finalize the measures, reaching an agreement on Friday, releasing the details of the legislation on Saturday and leaving both chambers with less than 48 hours to pass the bill. 
A legislative power play by Republicans in the Senate late Saturday led to an all-night session and hours of impassioned debate and objections from Democrats. Early Sunday, the Senate passed the bill largely along party lines.
During debate late Sunday, State Representative Travis Clardy, a Republican, acknowledged that advancing the bill through the conference committee had proved to be a lengthy process, but he defended the panel’s methods. 
“A lot of this was done late, I don’t get to control the clock,” Mr. Clardy said. “But I can assure you that the members of the committee did their absolute best, dead-level best, to make sure we’ve provided information to all members, including representative rows. And then we did everything that we could to make sure this was transparent.” 
The effort in Texas, a major state with a booming population, represents the apex of the national Republican push to install tall new barriers to voting after President Donald J. Trump’s loss last year to Joseph R. Biden Jr., with expansive restrictions already becoming law in Iowa, Georgia and Florida in 2021. Fueled by Mr. Trump’s false claims of widespread fraud in the election, Republicans have passed the bills almost entirely along partisan lines, brushing off the protestations of Democrats, civil rights groups, voting rights groups, major corporations and faith leaders.
But the party’s setback in Texas is unlikely to calm Democratic pressure in Washington to pass new federal voting laws. President Biden and key Democrats in Congress are confronting rising calls from their party to do whatever is needed — including abolishing the Senate filibuster, which moderate senators have resisted — to push through a major voting rights and elections overhaul that would counteract the wave of Republican laws. 
After the Texas bill became public on Saturday, Mr. Biden denounced it, along with similar measures in Georgia and Florida, as “an assault on democracy,” blasting the moves in a statement as “disproportionately targeting Black and Brown Americans.” 
He urged Congress to pass Democrats’ voting bills, the most ambitious of which, the For the People Act, would expand access to the ballot, reduce the role of money in politics, strengthen enforcement of existing election laws and limit gerrymandering. Another measure, the narrower John Lewis Voting Rights Act, would restore crucial parts of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that were struck down by the Supreme Court in 2013, including the requirement that some states receive federal approval before changing their election laws.
Aside from Texas, multiple states, including Arizona, Ohio and Michigan, have legislatures that are still in session and that may move forward on new voting laws. Republicans in Michigan have pledged to work around a likely veto from Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, by collecting signatures from citizens and seeking to pass new restrictions through a ballot initiative.
Republican lawmakers in battleground states have been backed in their effort by a party base and conservative media that have largely embraced the election falsehoods spread by Mr. Trump and his allies. G.O.P. legislators have argued that the nation must improve its “election security” even though the results of the last election have been confirmed by multiple audits, lawsuits, court decisions, election officials and even Mr. Trump’s own attorney general as free, safe, fair and secure. 
In debate late Sunday night, Democratic legislators seized on a provision added late in the process that would make it easier to overturn the results of an election in the state in some circumstances. Texas law previously required proof that illicit votes had resulted in a wrongful victory. The new measure says that the number of fraudulent votes would simply need to be equal to the winning vote differential; it would not matter for whom those votes had been cast.
“They can use this to overthrow the voice of the people, to overthrow the voice of Texas,” said State Representative John Bucy III, a Democrat from near Austin. “Do we want to throw out our ability to let the voices be heard through elections?”
As with bills passed in other states, voting rights groups said the new provisions in Texas, if passed, would be likely to disproportionately affect poorer people and those of color.
“All the provisions have an impact on minorities one way or another,” Gilberto Hinojosa, the chair of the Texas Democratic Party, said on Sunday. “That’s what it’s intended to. They’re not trying to stop Republicans from going out to vote. They’re trying to stop Democrats from going out to vote and the base of the Democratic Party is overwhelmingly African-American and Hispanic.”
Republicans in the Legislature had defended the bill, falsely arguing that it contained no restrictions on voting and saying that it was part of a yearslong effort to strengthen election security in the state. Even so, they acknowledged that there was no widespread voting fraud last year in Texas, and the Republican secretary of state testified that the state’s election was “smooth and secure.”
“This isn’t about who won or who lost, it’s really to make the process better,” State Senator Bryan Hughes, one of the Republican sponsors of the bill, said in an interview this month. “We want to make the elections more accessible and more secure, make them smoother.”
Briscoe Cain, the sponsor of the bill in the House, said late Sunday that the bill was meant to ensure that “conduct of elections be uniform and consistent throughout the state, to reduce the likelihood of fraud and the conduct of elections, to protect the secrecy the ballot, promote voter access and ensure that all legally cast ballots are counted.”
Voting rights groups have long pointed to Texas as one of the hardest states in the country for voters to cast ballots. One recent study by Northern Illinois University ranked Texas last in an index measuring the difficulty of voting. The report cited a host of factors, including a drastic reduction of polling stations in some parts of the state and strict voter identification laws.


Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: ELECTION LAW (95%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); GOVERNORS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); PARTISANSHIP (79%); ELECTION REFORM (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); ELECTION WORKERS (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); Texas (%); State Legislatures (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Law and Legislation (%); Republican Party (%); Democratic Party (%); Voting and Voters (%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); GREG ABBOTT (79%)
 Geographic: HOUSTON, TX, USA (74%); TEXAS, USA (94%)
 Load-Date: August 27, 2021

 

End of Document
Harris tells Texas Democrats they’re ‘American patriots’ for holding off G.O.P. voting bill.
The New York Times 
June 16, 2021 Wednesday 16:49 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 568 words
Byline: Katie Rogers
Highlight: It was the first high-profile meeting that the vice president had hosted since President Biden named her the leader of the administration’s broad efforts to protect voting rights.
Body




It was the first high-profile meeting that the vice president had hosted since President Biden named her the leader of the administration’s broad efforts to protect voting rights.
Vice President Kamala Harris on Wednesday met with Democratic members of the Texas Legislature who successfully staved off a voter restriction bill in their state last month, calling the group “American patriots” who had fought to preserve a fundamental democratic right.
“What we are seeing are examples of an attempt to marginalize and take from people, a right that has already been given. We are not asking for the bestowal of a right. We are talking about the preservation,” Ms. Harris told the group in remarks delivered in the Roosevelt Room. “That is the right of citizenship. And it’s that fundamental.”
It was the first high-profile meeting on the issue that Ms. Harris has hosted since President Biden named her the leader of the administration’s broad efforts to protect voting rights, an issue that Mr. Biden feels is central to his legacy. In a call with reporters before the meeting, three senior administration officials said the vice president was personally invested in the issue, and directly sees herself as a beneficiary of laws, including the Voting Rights Act, that have protected the right to vote.
The officials did not provide a concrete answer when asked how Ms. Harris’s convening of Texas Democrats could help the White House stake out a stronger position should Republicans in the state remain united to pass an election bill, as they have vowed to do this summer.
But the White House has repeatedly signaled that Ms. Harris will be using the “bully pulpit” of the vice presidency to bring attention to bills introduced in Republican-led statehouses across the country that are designed to eat away at voting protections. During a visit to Greenville, S.C., on Monday, Ms. Harris hosted a listening session with local activists to discuss what they are doing to get more people registered to vote, a key tactic that administration officials say will help counteract the restrictive laws at the local level.
“When we look at these attempts to infringe on people’s access to voting, we know that it is going to impact people,” Ms. Harris said in the Roosevelt Room. “Americans with disabilities, seniors, students, people of every walk of life.”
Two weeks ago, the Democrats in the Texas Legislature staged a dramatic, late-night walkout to force the failure of a sweeping Republican overhaul of state election laws. With two expansive pieces of voting-rights legislation facing bleak odds in the Senate, and Texas Republicans vowing to pass an elections bill anyway, the group has used the newfound attention to call for federal voting protections.
Yesterday, as part of a series of meetings designed to rally support for an expansive piece of federal legislation on voting, Senate Democrats invited the legislators to lunch to push for the bill. But a key invitee did not attend: Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, who has disparaged the bill, called the For the People Act, as too partisan, skipped the meeting.
In her own meeting, Ms. Harris took issue with the criticism that protecting voting rights was a partisan endeavor.
“We’re not telling people how to vote,” Ms. Harris said. “And, frankly, this is not a Democratic or a Republican issue; this is an American issue. This is an American issue.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: ELECTION LAW (91%); RIGHT TO VOTE (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); POLITICS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); CITIZENSHIP (73%); ELECTION REFORM (72%); VOTER REGISTRATION (72%); DISABLED PERSONS (60%); Harris, Kamala D (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Texas (%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (93%); KAMALA HARRIS (93%); Harris, Kamala D
 Geographic: GREENVILLE, SC, USA (53%); TEXAS, USA (95%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: July 12, 2021

 

End of Document
Manchin presents his wish list for a voting rights and ethics bill.
The New York Times 
June 16, 2021 Wednesday 20:04 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 711 words
Byline: Jonathan Weisman
Highlight: He expressed support for statutory expansions of early and mail-in voting that would turn back dozens of voting restriction laws in Republican-led state legislatures.
Body




He expressed support for statutory expansions of early and mail-in voting that would turn back dozens of voting restriction laws in Republican-led state legislatures.
Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, showing some flexibility on major voting rights legislation, indicated on Wednesday that he opposed the blanket prohibition on all voter identification laws in the Senate Democrats’ current version and would not support public financing of elections.
But he expressed support for statutory expansions of early and mail-in voting that would turn back dozens of voting restriction laws that have passed or are nearing passage in Republican legislatures in key states like Georgia, Florida and Texas.
He also suggested privately this week that he was working to alleviate pressure to end the legislative filibuster — a move that he has publicly promised to oppose — even though not even his version of a voting rights measure could overcome a Republican blockade.
For weeks, fellow Democrats have complained that Mr. Manchin would not say precisely what he needed — or needed to jettison — to get his signature as the 50th co-sponsor of the voting legislation, also known as S1. Instead, he simply said that he wanted a Republican to back the bill, thus making it bipartisan.
On Wednesday, he responded to that criticism with an exhaustive list of provisions for a voting rights, ethics and campaign finance bill that he could support. For Democrats, there was much to like. Mr. Manchin said he wanted Election Day to be a public holiday. He wants at least 15 consecutive days of early voting, including two weekends; a ban on partisan gerrymandering and the use of computer models to tailor House districts to a candidate’s political party; and a requirement that states send mail-in absentee ballots to eligible voters if they are unable to vote in person, among several other provisions to expand ballot access.
His provision would scale back the For the People Act’s mandated “no excuse” absentee ballot access, but remains broad.
On ethics, he would maintain many of S1’s efforts to address the abuses of President Donald J. Trump, including the mandatory release of presidential and vice-presidential tax returns, and the divestiture of all presidential business and financial interests within 30 days of taking office.
His campaign finance changes are not as far-reaching as those in the Democratic bill, but he would mandate disclosure of donors to “dark money” political committees and stronger rules to expose who is paying for social media advertising.
Together, Mr. Manchin’s proposals would make a significant bill, perhaps the biggest expansion of voting rights since passage of the Voting Rights Act.
“A good voting bill has to be accessible. It has to be fair and it has to be secure,” the senator told reporters on Wednesday.
But as long as 10 Republicans would be needed to break a filibuster, the Manchin version would have no chance of passage.
In a Zoom call reported by The Intercept, Mr. Manchin told the affluent financial supporters of the centrist group No Labels that he still hoped to preserve the filibuster, but that he needed some Republicans to help him prove that bipartisanship could still survive the toxic atmosphere in Congress.
Focusing on the filibuster of a bill to create a bipartisan commission to examine the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol, he told the group he needed help persuading three more Senate Republicans to join Democrats to allow it to move forward. He appeared to suggest that some of the business people on the call dangle job opportunities before Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri, who is retiring, to entice him to change his position.
“Roy Blunt is a great, just a good friend of mine, a great guy,” Mr. Manchin was heard saying. “Roy is retiring. If some of you all who might be working with Roy in his next life could tell him, ‘That’d be nice and it’d help our country,’ that would be very good to get him to change his vote. And we’re going to have another vote on this thing. That’ll give me one more shot at it.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (93%); POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); FILIBUSTER (91%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ETHICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); MAIL-IN VOTING (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); BALLOTS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); DIVESTITURES (73%); ELECTION REFORM (73%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); TAXES & TAXATION (72%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (50%); SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING (50%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Senate (%)
 Industry: MARKETING & ADVERTISING (66%); SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING (50%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (90%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); Manchin, Joe III
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%)
 Load-Date: June 21, 2021

 

End of Document
The Opposing Efforts at Election Reform
The New York Times
June 16, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; LETTERS
Length: 312 words
Body




Readers criticize Republican moves to tighten voter laws while Democrats are trying to pass a bill to expand access to the ballot.
To the Editor: 
  Re ''Joe Manchin Has a Point About Voting Reform'' (Opinion guest essay, June 12):
  Christopher Caldwell's attack on the For the People Act and other attempts to allow as many citizens as possible access to the ballot boils down to this: The simpler the election, the more it will be trusted; the more complicated an election, the more prone to chicanery and fraud.
  He neglects to note that in the last presidential election we had just the kind of apparatus he criticizes: mail-in voting, absentee voting, early voting, late vote counting, curbside voting, drop boxes, harvesting and all the rest. Yet Mr. Trump's director of cybersecurity at the Department of Homeland Security, Christopher Krebs, said the election was ''the most secure in American history.''
  This unpleasant fact undermines Mr. Caldwell's folderol.
  Leslie EpsteinBrookline, Mass.
  To the Editor:
  Christopher Caldwell writes, ''Absent a pandemic, there is a coherent case that there should never be absentee or mail-in balloting.'' Oh, really? Tell that to all those people living in nursing homes or who are shut in and cannot physically get to a polling place. Tell that to the millions of college students who have classes on Tuesdays and simply cannot get home to vote in person. And tell that to all the members of our military who are currently serving overseas to protect our right to vote.
  Ann GallerGarrison, N.Y.
  To the Editor:
  Republican efforts to pass voting restrictions might make sense if Republicans lost most of their elections in 2020, but in fact they made gains in the House and won eight out of 11 contests for governor. Making voting more accessible and easier for all is the only bipartisan strategy!
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Letter
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTION REFORM (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); MAIL-IN VOTING (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); BALLOTS (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); RIGHT TO VOTE (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); HISTORY (67%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (64%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (53%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (53%)
 Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (55%)
 Industry: INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (68%)
 Person: JOE MANCHIN (58%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 16, 2021

 

End of Document
Democratic Report Raises 2022 Alarm on Messaging And Voter Misinformation
The New York Times
June 7, 2021 Monday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1693 words
Byline: By Alexander Burns
Body




A new report, in perhaps the most thorough soul-searching done by either party this year, points to an urgent need for the party to present a positive economic agenda and rebut Republican misinformation.
Democrats defeated President Donald J. Trump and captured the Senate last year with a racially diverse coalition that delivered victories by tiny margins in key states like Georgia, Arizona and Wisconsin. 
  In the next election, they cannot count on repeating that feat, a new report warns.
  A review of the 2020 election, conducted by several prominent Democratic advocacy groups, has concluded that the party is at risk of losing ground with Black, Hispanic and Asian American voters unless it does a better job presenting an economic agenda and countering Republican efforts to spread misinformation and tie all Democratic candidates to the far left.
  The 73-page report, obtained by The New York Times, was assembled at the behest of three major Democratic interest groups: Third Way, a centrist think tank, and the Collective PAC and the Latino Victory Fund, which promote Black and Hispanic candidates. It appears to be the most thorough act of self-criticism carried out by Democrats or Republicans after the last campaign.
  The document is all the more striking because it is addressed to a victorious party: Despite their successes, Democrats had hoped to achieve more robust control of both chambers of Congress, rather than the ultra-precarious margins they enjoy.
  In part, the study found, Democrats fell short of their aspirations because many House and Senate candidates failed to match Joseph R. Biden Jr.'s support with voters of color who loathed Mr. Trump but distrusted the Democratic Party as a whole. Those constituencies included Hispanic voters in Florida and Texas, Vietnamese American and Filipino American voters in California, and Black voters in North Carolina.
  Overall, the report warns, Democrats in 2020 lacked a core argument about the economy and recovering from the coronavirus pandemic -- one that might have helped candidates repel Republican claims that they wanted to ''keep the economy shut down,'' or worse. The party ''leaned too heavily on 'anti-Trump' rhetoric,'' the report concludes.
  ''Win or lose, self-described progressive or moderate, Democrats consistently raised a lack of strong Democratic Party brand as a significant concern in 2020,'' the report states. ''In the absence of strong party branding, the opposition latched on to G.O.P. talking points, suggesting our candidates would 'burn down your house and take away the police.'''
  Former Representative Debbie Mucarsel-Powell, a Democrat who lost re-election in South Florida in November, said in an interview that she had spoken with the authors of the report and raised concerns about Democratic outreach to Hispanic voters and the party's failure to rebut misinformation in Spanish-language media.
  ''Unfortunately, the Democratic Party has in some ways lost touch with our electorate,'' Ms. Mucarsel-Powell said. ''There is this assumption that of course people of color, or the working class, are going to vote for Democrats. We can never assume anything.''
  The report, chiefly written by a pair of veteran Democratic operatives, Marlon Marshall and Lynda Tran, is among the most significant salvos yet in the Democratic Party's internal debate about how it should approach the 2022 elections. It may stir skepticism from some quarters because of the involvement of Third Way, which much of the left regards with hostility.
  A fourth group that initially backed the study, the campaign finance reform group End Citizens United, backed away this spring. Tiffany Muller, the head of the group, said it had to abandon its involvement to focus instead on passing the For the People Act, a sweeping good-government bill that is stuck in the Senate.
  Mr. Marshall and Ms. Tran, as well as the groups sponsoring the review, have begun to share its conclusions with Democratic lawmakers and party officials in recent days, including Jaime Harrison, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
  The study spanned nearly six months of research and data analysis that scrutinized about three dozen races for the House and the Senate, and involved interviews with 143 people, including lawmakers, candidates and pollsters, people involved in assembling the report said. Among the campaigns reviewed were the Senate elections in Arizona, Georgia and North Carolina, as well as House races in the suburbs of Minneapolis, Los Angeles, Atlanta and Dallas, and in rural New Mexico and Maine.
  The study follows an internal review conducted by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee that was unveiled last month. Both projects found that Democratic candidates had been hobbled by flawed polling and pandemic-imposed limitations on campaigning.
  In the D.C.C.C. report, the committee attributed setbacks at the congressional level to a surge in turnout by Trump supporters and an inadequate Democratic response to attacks calling them police-hating socialists.
  Some lawmakers on the left have complained that criticism of left-wing messaging amounts to scapegoating activists for the party's failures.
  Yet the review by Third Way, the Collective PAC and the Latino Victory Fund goes further in diagnosing the party's messaging as deficient in ways that may have cost Democrats more than a dozen seats in the House. Its report offers a blunt assessment that in 2020, Republicans succeeded in misleading voters about the Democratic Party's agenda and that Democrats had erred by speaking to voters of color as though they are a monolithic, left-leaning group.
  Representative Tony Cárdenas of California, who last year helmed the Congressional Hispanic Caucus's political action committee, embraced that critique of Democratic messaging and said the party should discard the assumption ''that voters of color are inherently more progressive.''
  ''That's been a ridiculous idea and that's never been true,'' Mr. Cárdenas said, lamenting that Republicans had succeeded in ''trying to confuse Latino voters with the socialism message, things of that nature, 'defund the police.'''
  Quentin James, the president of the Collective PAC, said it was clear that ''some of the rhetoric we see from coastal Democrats'' had been problematic. Mr. James pointed to the activist demand to ''defund'' the police as especially harmful, even with supporters of policing overhauls.
  ''We did a poll that showed Black voters, by and large, vastly support reforming the police and reallocating their budgets,'' Mr. James said. ''That terminology -- 'defund' -- was not popular in the Black community.''
  Kara Eastman, a progressive Democrat who lost her bid for a House seat based in Omaha, said Republicans had succeeded in delivering a ''barrage of messages'' that tarred her and her party as being outside the mainstream. Ms. Eastman said she had told the authors of the 2020 review that she believed those labels were particularly damaging to women.
  Matt Bennett, a Third Way strategist, said the party needed to be far better prepared to mount a defense in the midterm campaign.
  ''We have got to take very seriously these attacks on Democrats as radicals and stipulate that they land,'' Mr. Bennett said. ''A lot of this just didn't land on Joe Biden.''
  Democrats maintained a large advantage with voters of color in the 2020 elections, but the report identified telling areas of weakness. Mr. Biden and other Democrats lost ground with Latino voters relative to the party's performance in 2016, ''especially among working-class and non-college voters in these communities,'' the report found.
  The report found that a surge in Asian American turnout appeared to have secured Mr. Biden's victory in Georgia but that Democratic House candidates ran behind Mr. Biden with Asian American voters in contested California and Texas races. In some important states, Democrats did not mobilize Black voters at the same rate that Republicans did conservative white voters.
  ''A substantial boost in turnout netted Democrats more raw votes from Black voters than in 2016, but the explosive growth among white voters in most races outpaced these gains,'' the report warns.
  There has been no comparable self-review on the Republican side after the party's severe setbacks last year, mainly because G.O.P. leaders have no appetite for a debate about Mr. Trump's impact.
  The Republican Party faces serious political obstacles, arising from Mr. Trump's unpopularity, the growing liberalism of young voters and the country's growing diversity. Many of the party's policies are unpopular, including cutting social-welfare and retirement-security programs and keeping taxes low for the wealthy and big corporations.
  Yet the structure of the American electoral system has tilted national campaigns toward the G.O.P., because of congressional gerrymandering and the disproportionate representation of rural white voters in the Senate and the Electoral College.
  Democratic hopes for the midterm elections have so far hinged on the prospect of a strong recovery from the coronavirus pandemic and on voters' regarding Republicans as a party unsuited to governing.
  Representative Mikie Sherrill of New Jersey, a moderate Democrat who was briefed on the findings of the report, called it proof that the party needed a strong central message about the economy in 2022.
  ''We need to continue to show the American people what we've done, and then talk incessantly across the country, in every town, about how Democrats are governing,'' Ms. Sherrill said.
  Largely unaddressed in the report is the immense deficit Democrats face among lower-income white voters. In its conclusion, however, Mr. Marshall and Ms. Tran write that Democrats need to deliver a message that includes working-class whites and matches the G.O.P.'s clear ''collective gospel'' about low taxes and military strength.
  ''Our gospel should be about championing all working people -- including but not limited to white working people -- and lifting up our values of opportunity, equity, inclusion,'' they write.
             
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); RACE & ETHNICITY (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); ASIAN AMERICANS (89%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (89%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); FAR LEFT POLITICS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); CENTRISM (77%); ELECTIONS (77%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (73%); CORONAVIRUSES (69%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (62%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (61%); PANDEMICS (50%); VIRUSES (50%)
 Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); DEBBIE MUCARSEL-POWELL (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: June 7, 2021

 

End of Document
Texas G.O.P. Races to Pass Voting Bill as State Democrats Push Back
The New York Times 
May 30, 2021 Sunday 09:58 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1633 words
Byline: Nick Corasaniti
Highlight: Democrats in the Legislature pledged an all-out fight to try to stall the bill, which contains some of the strictest voting provisions in the country, and prevent it from passing by a midnight deadline.
Body




Democrats in the Legislature pledged an all-out fight to try to stall the bill, which contains some of the strictest voting provisions in the country, and prevent it from passing by a midnight deadline. 
Note: Just before midnight on Sunday, Texas Democrats in the Legislature staged a walkout to force the temporary failure of the Republican election bill. Read more. 
The Republican-controlled Texas Legislature was racing against the clock on Sunday night to pass a sweeping overhaul of the state’s election laws that would rubber-stamp some of the most rigid voting restrictions in the country, but Democrats were pledging an all-out fight to try to stall the bill and prevent it from passing by a midnight deadline. 
Though Republicans control both chambers, Democrats were becoming increasingly bullish on their chances of delaying passage of the bill and preventing it from coming to a floor vote in the House through either legislative maneuvers or a lengthy debate. Earlier on Sunday, after a legislative power play by Republicans that led to an all-night session and hours of impassioned debate and objections from Democrats, the Senate passed the bill.
Republicans in the House professed confidence that the bill would still pass on Sunday. Failure to meet the deadline would represent a setback for G.O.P. lawmakers determined to usher in a raft of new limits to voting, and would force Gov. Greg Abbott, a Republican, to call a special session of the Legislature to pass the bill. 
Mr. Abbott, who could call a special session as early as June, has previously stated that an election overhaul was one of his top priorities for this legislative session, and he was widely expected to sign whatever bill Republicans passed.
The bill includes new restrictions on absentee voting; grants broad new autonomy and authority to partisan poll watchers; escalates punishments for mistakes or offenses by election officials; and bans both drive-through voting and 24-hour voting, which were used for the first time during the 2020 election in Harris County, home to Houston and a growing number of the state’s Democratic voters. 
The bill in Texas, a major state with a booming population, represents the apex of the national Republican push to install tall new barriers to voting after President Donald J. Trump’s loss last year to Joseph R. Biden Jr., with expansive restrictions already becoming law in Iowa, Georgia and Florida in 2021. Fueled by Mr. Trump’s false claims of widespread fraud in the election, Republicans have passed the bills almost entirely along partisan lines, brushing off the protestations of Democrats, civil rights groups, voting rights groups, major corporations and faith leaders.
President Biden and key Democrats in Congress are confronting rising calls from their party to do whatever is needed — including abolishing the Senate filibuster, which moderate senators have resisted — to push through a major voting rights and elections overhaul that would counteract the wave of Republican laws. After the Texas bill became public on Saturday, Mr. Biden denounced it, along with similar measures in Georgia and Florida, as “an assault on democracy,” blasting the moves in a statement as “disproportionately targeting Black and Brown Americans.” 
He urged Congress to pass Democrats’ voting bills, the most ambitious of which, the For the People Act, would expand access to the ballot, reduce the role of money in politics, strengthen enforcement of existing election laws and limit gerrymandering. Another measure, the narrower John Lewis Voting Rights Act, would restore crucial parts of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that were struck down by the Supreme Court in 2013, including the requirement that some states receive federal approval before changing their election laws.
The bill in Texas, if it passes, is unlikely to be the final G.O.P. voting legislation  this year. Multiple states, including Arizona, Ohio and Michigan, have legislatures that are still in session and that may move forward on new voting laws. Republicans in Michigan have pledged to work around a likely veto from Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, by collecting signatures from citizens and seeking to pass new restrictions through a ballot initiative.
Republican lawmakers in battleground states have been backed in their effort by a party base and conservative media that have largely embraced the election falsehoods spread by Mr. Trump and his allies. G.O.P. legislators have argued that the nation must improve its “election security” even though the results of the last election have been confirmed by multiple audits, lawsuits, court decisions, election officials and even Mr. Trump’s own attorney general as free, safe, fair and secure. 
In a provision added late in the process, the Texas bill would make it easier to overturn the results of an election in the state in some circumstances. Texas law previously required proof that illicit votes had resulted in a wrongful victory. The new measure says that the number of fraudulent votes would simply need to be equal to the winning vote differential; it would not matter for whom those votes had been cast.
By seeking to ban drive-through voting, 24-hour voting and the use of tents or temporary structures as polling locations, the Legislature is targeting cities and suburban areaswhere Democrats did well in November; roughly 140,000 residents of Harris County used one of those methods in the 2020 election. The bill would also bar election officials from mailing out absentee ballot applications to voters who have not specifically requested them, and says that any voter with “an illness, injury or disability that does not prevent the voter from appearing at the polling place on election day” may not cast a ballot by mail. 
The bill also creates new regulations for the maintenance of voter rolls, which could lead to bigger and more frequent purges of voters from the lists. And it would give partisan poll watchers extensive access to voting sites, stating that they must able to sit or stand close enough to “see and hear the election officers.” 
As with bills passed in other states, voting rights groups say the new provisions in Texas would be likely to disproportionately affect poorer people and those of color.
“They are intent on creating voting restrictions that reverse the trends that you’ve seen in Texas,” Gilberto Hinojosa, the chair of the Texas Democratic Party, said in an interview this month. “And they’re all geared around minorities in the sense that they are primarily affecting large urban areas that are where most of the people of color in this state live today.”
“What they’re trying to do is create a system that discourages people from actually going out to vote,” he said.
Republicans in the Legislature have defended the bill, falsely arguing that it contains no restrictions on voting and saying that it is part of a yearslong effort to strengthen election security in the state. Even so, they have acknowledged that there was no widespread voting fraud last year in Texas, and the Republican secretary of state testified that the state’s election was “smooth and secure.”
“This isn’t about who won or who lost, it’s really to make the process better,” State Senator Bryan Hughes, one of the Republican sponsors of the bill, said in an interview this month. “We want to make the elections more accessible and more secure, make them smoother.”
Mr. Hughes pointed to a case in which a Democratic county commissioner in his district was indicted in October on charges of fraudulently soliciting mail votes.
“When the problems occur in the elections in Texas, we try to address them,” Mr. Hughes said. “How much fraud is OK? It’s never acceptable to have fraudulent elections.”
Voting rights groups have long pointed to Texas as one of the hardest states in the country for voters to cast ballots. One recent study by Northern Illinois University ranked Texas last in an index measuring the difficulty of voting. The report cited a host of factors, including a drastic reduction of polling stations in some parts of the state and strict voter identification laws.
As the spring legislative session neared its conclusion on Monday, the process took several unexpected turns that sent the deliberations deep into the early morning hours — on Friday, when the final provisions were hammered out, and then again late Saturday, when Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick and other Republicans suspended rules that require a bill to be public for 24 hours before a final vote. That set off hours of debate before the Senate passed the bill around 6 a.m. Sunday by an 18-to-13 vote. 
Democrats denounced the dark-of-night legislative maneuver on a measure that State Senator Borris L. Miles, a Democrat from Houston, said people in his largely Black and Latino district called “Jim Crow 2.0.”
“They do ask me, every time I’m in the neighborhood, Is this 2021 or is this 1961?” Mr. Miles said on the Senate floor. “And why are we allowing people to roll back the hands of time?”
State Senator Royce West, a Democrat from Dallas, raised concerns that a provision banning voting before 1 p.m. on Sundays would limit “souls to the polls” organizing efforts that are popular with Black churches. Mr. Hughes said that clause was intended to allow poll workers to go to church.
Mr. West noted that a separate bill passed by the Legislature would allow the sale of beer and wine starting at 10 a.m., two hours earlier than current law permits.
“We’re going to be able to buy beer at 10 o’clock in the morning, but we can’t vote until 1 o’clock,” he said.
Austin Ramzy and Anna Schaverien contributed reporting.
PHOTO: The Texas effort is part of a national push for barriers to voting, fueled by false claims of fraud. 

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); ELECTION LAW (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); ELECTION FRAUD (89%); ELECTION REFORM (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); PARTISANSHIP (89%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (89%); FILIBUSTER (79%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (79%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MAIL-IN VOTING (78%); POLITICS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); CONTESTED ELECTIONS (76%); FALSE STATEMENTS (76%); ELECTION WORKERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); STRIKES (72%); GOSSIP & RUMORS (71%); POPULATION GROWTH (65%); Texas (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Law and Legislation (%); Voter Fraud (Election Fraud) (%); Rumors and Misinformation (%); Republican Party (%); State Legislatures (%); Democratic Party (%); Abbott, Gregory W (1957- ) (%); Hughes, Bryan (1969- ) (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Voting and Voters (%)
 Person: GREG ABBOTT (93%); JOE BIDEN (92%); Abbott, Gregory W (1957- ); Hughes, Bryan (1969- ); Biden, Joseph R Jr
 Geographic: HOUSTON, TX, USA (73%); TEXAS, USA (94%)
 Load-Date: June 8, 2021

 

End of Document
Kamala Harris Can't Win
The New York Times
June 6, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 3; FRANK BRUNI
Length: 1234 words
Byline: By Frank Bruni
Body




Frank Bruni will stop writing regular Opinion columns in late June, but his popular weekly newsletter will live on. To keep up with his political analysis, cultural commentary and personal reflections, sign up here. 
  For a while there, Kamala Harris went missing.
  There was so much else going on: the excruciating limbo between Election Day and the declaration of a winner, the sitting president's refusal to accept that result, his tantrums, the lawsuits, the insurrection, the impeachment.
  For the first time, a woman had been elected vice president of the United States. A woman of color at that. But while that was certainly noted -- there were the requisite headlines, the expected tweets -- it wasn't trumpeted as triumphantly as it could and should have been, because Donald Trump once again sucked up all the oxygen.
  On top of which: The pandemic. America was masked, and Harris was muffled.
  No more. Lately she has been drawing all kinds of attention, including overwrought attacks from Republican politicians and the conservative media, who seem to be taking the antipathy they once lavished on Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama and heaping it on her. Best to nip this trailblazer in the bud.
  No time to waste! The prospect of Joe Biden, 78, exiting the presidency after one term is hardly the craziest scenario, and she's his heir apparent. The road to Republican restoration runs right over her.
  That's why Nikki Haley, so covetous of the White House herself, denounced Harris for a tweet last Saturday in which Harris encouraged Americans to ''enjoy the long weekend.''
  ''Unprofessional and unfit,'' Haley labeled it, because ... nobody goes to the beach on Memorial Day? Nobody barbecues? It was as if Harris had done something truly damaging, like abetting a despot intent on subverting American democracy. Harris may have failed, in that one terse tweet, to mention the uniformed men and women who had died in service to the country, but she honored them in other contexts. As for Haley, well, there's a musty saying that comes to mind. It concerns glass houses.
  Harris has many stones being thrown at her, from multiple directions. Fox News harangues her daily, in articles on its website and in tweets, about her supposed failure to hold a news conference -- as if vice-presidential news conferences are a big thing. News flash: They're not, and if she made them so, her detractors would change tacks and say that she was arrogantly showing Biden up.
  In National Review, Charles Cooke recently wrote a takedown of her under the headline: ''The Democrats Have a Kamala Harris Problem.'' The New York Post editorial board panned her commencement address at the U.S. Naval Academy, calling it ''Naval gazing.'' Clever. Also gratuitous -- and a sign of how deeply under her opponents' skin she gets.
  Those attacks coincide with the upsizing of the tasks that Biden has assigned her. Having asked her last March to work on stemming migration across the southern border, he identified her on Tuesday as the administration's lead on voting rights. That's huge. The issue is a defining one for many Democrats, a top legislative priority for the party and a furiously argued point of contention between them and Republicans.
  ''It's going to take a hell of a lot of work,'' Biden said when he made the announcement about her newest responsibility in Tulsa, Okla., on Tuesday.
  Success is iffy, but acrimony is certain.
  ''If I was Vice President Harris and President Biden kept giving me the toughest assignments, I'd be like, 'What's up, dude?''' David Chalian, CNN's political director, said on the CNN Political Briefing podcast on Wednesday. ''Add this now to her plate with immigration and she's got some truly tough political battles ahead.''
  ''She's now in charge of overseeing the passage of the For the People Act,'' Chalian added, referring to the voting-rights bill that passed the House but looks to be doomed in the Senate. ''Not even all the Democrats are on board.'' Even if she gets them there, they'd need to junk the filibuster and she'd have to cast a tiebreaking vote in order to put the legislation on Biden's desk. Republicans' demonization of her would be boundless.
  And yet she asked for the voting-rights lead, according to an article in The Times on Thursday by Katie Rogers and Nicholas Fandos. That's gutsy. It's also a bold retort to the narrative that she has been tiptoeing through the vice presidency.
  ''She continues to retreat behind talking points and platitudes in public,'' Edward-Isaac Dovere wrote in an assessment of her in The Atlantic last month. He noted that her critics ''see her vice presidency so far as a collection of unconnected set pieces. Harris arrives somewhere with the plane and the motorcade and the Secret Service agents, makes a few mostly bland statements, then tells whomever she's meeting with about how she's going to bring their stories back to Washington. Then she's quickly out of sight again.''
  But what, exactly, is she supposed to do? She confronts the confines in which a vice president has to operate on top of the similar confines in which Black people and women in positions of power are often expected to operate. It's a Goldilocks double or even triple whammy. Too strong a voice and you're stepping outside of your place. Too soft a voice and you're timidly failing to rise to the occasion.
  Harris can't win. I mean in general, but I also know many Democrats who think that she can't win in 2024 or 2028, not because Republicans will relentlessly savage her -- though they'll indeed do that -- but because she has never established sufficient popularity with voters nationally, faces the taller hurdles and extra pushback that minorities typically do and hasn't always been the most dexterous political operator. So while she's trying not to make any false steps, she really does have something to prove.
  How sensitive to that is Biden, and how supportive? I don't detect any carry-over of the tension between him and Harris in the Democratic presidential primary, but it's important to remember that Biden's model for the relationship between a vice president and a president is his with Barack Obama, and Obama didn't nurture Biden's political ambitions or set him up for a promotion. He did that for Hillary Clinton instead.
  This is one fraught, fascinating vice presidency. Harris has (and has already used) that tiebreaking vote, on account of a 50-50 Senate, which makes her even more of a lightning rod.
  Additionally, Biden's approach to governing has not been to tug the spotlight toward him -- rather to lie low in public as he tends to business behind the scenes -- and he has proved difficult for Republicans to tear down. That intensifies their scrutiny of Harris.
  I doubt that any of this is a shock to her.
  ''She's very aware that her being in this position is a threat to many people,'' Valerie Jarrett, who was a senior adviser to Obama during his presidency, told me. ''They're terrified of seeing a woman of color in this kind of position of authority and responsibility. But with every position she's ever had in her career in public service, she's dealt with the same reaction. So she's used to this, and part of what will make her successful is her ability to ignore the noise.''
  It's only going to get louder from here.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: POLITICS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION GRADUATION (60%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (60%); US NAVY (60%); SUITS & CLAIMS (56%)
 Company:  FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (63%);  BEST INC (55%)
 Organization: VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES (57%)
 Ticker: BEST (NYSE) (55%)
 Industry: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (63%); SIC4833 TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS (63%); NAICS453998 ALL OTHER MISCELLANEOUS STORE RETAILERS (EXCEPT TOBACCO STORES) (55%); SIC5999 MISCELLANEOUS RETAIL STORES, NEC (55%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (90%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS (90%); MISC STORE RETAILERS (90%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (90%); RETAILERS (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (77%); TOBACCO STORES (77%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (60%); US NAVY (60%)
 Person: KAMALA HARRIS (93%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); NIKKI HALEY (71%); BARACK OBAMA (57%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: June 6, 2021

 

End of Document
Biden’s (Remote) Chance to Make the Rich Pay Their Share; On Politics
The New York Times 
June 9, 2021 Wednesday 20:27 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1394 words
Byline: Giovanni Russonello
Highlight: The president and liberal Democrats spy a rare opportunity — but face resistance from Republicans and moderate Democrats.
Body




The president and liberal Democrats spy a rare opportunity — but face resistance from Republicans and moderate Democrats.
Raising taxes on the wealthiest Americans was already a widely popular idea before ProPublica published a report on Tuesday that threw back the curtain on just how easily the richest Americans have been avoiding taxation.
But popularity isn’t everything: On Capitol Hill, tax protections for wealthy Americans have been among the hardest things to attack, thanks to the ever-growing influence of big money in politics.
Billionaires like Jeff Bezos and Michael Bloomberg have effectively been paying taxes at a rate of about 1 percent of their wealth gains, the ProPublica report found, largely because the tax system treats investments and wealth differently than it does earned income.
President Biden has said he’d like to revamp parts of this system, and the White House has already proposed a number of reforms that would patch some of the loopholes and carve-outs that allow the wealthiest Americans to pay so little in taxes.
“It’s time for corporate America and the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans to just begin to pay their fair share — just their fair share,” Mr. Biden said in April during his first address to a joint session of Congress, outlining his proposals to raise taxes on corporations and high-level investors.
The president and many liberal Democrats spy an opportunity. About three in five Americans have expressed support for higher taxes on corporations and the wealthy to pay for infrastructure projects and climate action, according to a range of recent polls. That includes a solid majority of independents.
Which helps explain why raising taxes on the rich was such a prominent issue on the campaign trail, particularly during the Democratic primary, when progressives like Senators Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders pushed for an extensive tax overhaul. As president, Mr. Biden has embraced many of their goals.
Still, like so many items on his agenda, those proposals are staunchly opposed by most Republican lawmakers. So it doesn’t help Mr. Biden that the most conservative Democratic senator, Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, is dead set on finding bipartisan compromise. Or that Mr. Manchin himself is a fairly reliable ally of big business, and has already expressed opposition to some of Mr. Biden’s tax ideas.
Robert Reich, a professor of public policy at the University of California, Berkeley, and former secretary of labor under President Bill Clinton, noted that Democrats as well as Republicans are heavily funded by corporate interests.
“With great wealth comes political power, and the intricacies of the tax code are the place where that power is wielded most efficiently,” Mr. Reich said in an interview.
“This is the vicious cycle we’ve gotten ourselves into over the last 25, 30 years, particularly,” added Mr. Reich, whose most recent book is “The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It.” “You’ve got platoons of accountants and tax lawyers who are not only working for wealthy individuals, finding ways to avoid paying taxes, but you also have entire armies of lobbyists working directly and indirectly for the wealthy, making sure that the loopholes stay in place.”
Mr. Reich said that the For the People Act, the voting rights bill that has become a major goal of Democrats, would attack this system by imposing new limits on private campaign spending. But that bill now appears destined to die in the Senate, after Mr. Manchin came out against it on Sunday.
Corporate tax
The Biden administration is pursuing a few major avenues to extract taxes from the wealthiest Americans. Its American Jobs Plan, a $2 trillion proposal to address infrastructure and climate change, includes a measure to raise the corporate tax rate to 28 percent.
In a recent ABC News/Washington Post poll, 58 percent of Americans supported that increase to the corporate tax rate — making it more popular than the infrastructure plan overall, which was supported by 52 percent of respondents.
The corporate tax rate had been 35 percent until President Donald J. Trump’s tax cuts of 2017 slashed it to 21 percent. But Mr. Manchin — whose voting record is to the right of even some Republicans’ — has said he favors a more modest bump, to 25 percent.
Republicans, of course, have said that any changes to Mr. Trump’s rewriting of the tax code would be unacceptable to them. Mr. Manchin and Senator Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, a fellow Democrat, have joined six Republican senators in seeking a compromise deal on infrastructure, though it’s anyone’s guess whether they will be able to reach a deal that satisfies the White House.
Democrats could pass the American Jobs Plan without Republican support, through the process of budgetary reconciliation, but Mr. Manchin has said he’s against doing that.
Capital gains and inheritances
The Biden administration’s other big plan to reap more from the wealthy involves taxes on capital gains and inheritances. This comes as part of its American Families Plan, which is focused on funding what the president calls “human infrastructure.”
Mr. Biden’s proposal would raise the effective tax rate on capital gains — that is, money from stocks, bonds and property sales — to 43 percent, up from its current level of 20 percent. This increase wouldn’t affect investment inheritances, such as 401(k)s, and would apply only to those earning upward of $1 million a year in capital gains.
Separately, Mr. Biden has proposed ending what’s called the “stepped-up basis” for taxing wealthy people’s inheritances. Currently, those who inherit assets from a deceased family member can immediately sell off those assets (property, stocks, what have you) without paying any tax. Mr. Biden’s proposal would force those who inherit assets greater than $1 million to pay tax on however much the assets increased in value while their relative owned them.
But Republicans strongly oppose cutting into wealthy people’s inheritances, calling it a “death tax.”
Lawmakers are unlikely to take up the American Families Plan until after they have dealt with the jobs proposal currently being negotiated in the Senate.
How the system works (and doesn’t)
The U.S. system generally taxes only “realized gains” — that is, wages or profits made from sales. If the worth of your assets grows, you generally won’t get taxed on it until you sell off that asset. In an economy where most rich people’s wealth exists in the form of investments, a portfolio can grow exponentially without being taxed much at all.
And thanks to the stepped-up basis for inheritance tax, your heir can sell off those assets after you die without being taxed, either.
A pair of economists at the University of California, Berkeley, have estimated that the assets of American billionaires alone have made gains of roughly $2.7 trillion that was never taxed.
And in practice, rich people often use their nontaxable assets as collateral to take out loans, which allows them to spend lavishly using their potential money, rather than anything they’ve actually earned.
This, Mr. Reich said, has contributed to a situation in which frustration with inequality “is the strongest force in American politics today.”
He added, “To keep it focused in a constructive direction is difficult.”
He pointed to the example of Mr. Trump, who drew upon frustration with elites in his winning 2016 presidential campaign, but who governed as an ally of the wealthy.
For Mr. Biden, he said, the challenge would be to deliver results that showed voters he was not only helping to dismantle the protections that have privileged millionaires and billionaires — but also using that money to strengthen the social safety net.
“Instead of making the wealthy public enemy No. 1, the real goal is to try to focus the public’s attention on the importance of a fair tax system that is going to generate enough revenue that the country needs,” Mr. Reich said. “And that’s the trick. That’s the biggest balancing act.”

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: WEALTHY PEOPLE (96%); POLITICAL PARTIES (92%); TAXES & TAXATION (92%); TAX INCREASES (91%); LIBERALISM (90%); POLITICS (90%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (90%); TAX LAW (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CAPITAL GAINS TAX (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); ESTATE TAX (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TAX CONSULTING (78%); TAX REFORM (78%); UPPER INCOME PERSONS (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Federal Taxes (US) (%); Corporate Taxes (%); Inheritance and Estate Taxes (%); Capital Gains Tax (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Polls and Public Opinion (%); High Net Worth Individuals (%); Taxation (%)
 Industry: ESTATE TAX (78%); TAX CONSULTING (78%); AFFLUENT MARKET (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (93%); ELIZABETH WARREN (79%); BERNIE SANDERS (58%); BILL CLINTON (58%); JEFFREY P BEZOS (58%); JOE MANCHIN (58%); MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (58%); Biden, Joseph R Jr
 Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%)
 Load-Date: June 9, 2021

 

End of Document
Harris Asked to Lead on Voting Rights. She Has Her Work Cut Out.
The New York Times
June 4, 2021 Friday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 1614 words
Byline: By Katie Rogers and Nicholas Fandos
Body




Her new role comes as the Senate enters a crucial month in the Democratic drive to enact the most extensive elections overhaul in a generation.
WASHINGTON -- Vice President Kamala Harris did not come to her role with a list of demands. She wanted to be a generalist, in large part to learn the political rhythms of a president she was still getting to know. In the first few months of her tenure, some of her portfolio assignments were just that: assignments. 
  But on the matter of protecting voting rights, an issue critically important to President Biden's legacy, Ms. Harris took a rare step. In a meeting with the president over a month ago, she told him that she wanted to take the lead on the issue.
  Mr. Biden agreed, two people familiar with the discussions said, and his advisers decided to time the announcement of Ms. Harris's new role to a speech he delivered on Tuesday in Tulsa, Okla. In his remarks, the president declared the efforts of Republican-led statehouses around the country to make it harder to vote as an ''assault on our democracy, '' and said Ms. Harris could help lead the charge against them.
  He also gave a blunt assessment of the task: ''It's going to take a hell of a lot of work.''
  Back in Washington, the president's announcement has not clearly illuminated a path forward for Ms. Harris, whose involvement in the issue stands to become her most politically delicate engagement yet. Her new role comes as the Senate enters a crucial month in the Democratic drive to enact the farthest-reaching elections overhaul in a generation, including a landmark expansion of voting rights that is faltering in the Senate.
  Her office has not yet announced its plans, aside from calls Ms. Harris held with civil rights activists, including Derrick Johnson, the president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and a few scheduled meetings with prominent voting rights groups. Her advisers say she will take a wide-ranging approach to the issue by giving speeches, convening stakeholders and using the vice-presidential bully pulpit to raise awareness of the importance of the vote.
  ''The work of voting rights has implications for not just one year down the road or four years down the road but 50 years from now,'' Symone D. Sanders, the vice president's senior adviser and press secretary, said in an interview on Wednesday. ''The president understands that and the vice president understands that, and that's why we will implement a comprehensive strategy.''
  The voting rights bill faces a more urgent timeline. The vast majority of the party has agreed to make the bill the party's top legislative priority, and Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader, vowed to put it up for a vote later this month so any changes could be put into effect before the 2022 elections.
  With just weeks to go, it remains far from clear if it can actually pass. Because Republicans have locked arms in opposition, the only path forward would require all 50 Democrats -- plus Ms. Harris, who serves as the tiebreaking vote in an evenly divided Senate -- to support not only the substance of the bill, but changing the filibuster rule requiring 60 votes to approve major legislation, allowing it to pass with a simple majority instead.
  A handful of Democratic senators have expressed unease about changing the filibuster, while Senators Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, have been more adamant in their opposition.
  Mr. Biden has already pledged to sign the bill, which the House passed with only Democratic votes this spring. Known as the For the People Act, the bill would overhaul the nation's elections system by creating new national requirements for early and mail-in voting, rein in campaign donations and limit partisan gerrymandering. But with the bill all but stalled in the Senate, Mr. Biden has repeatedly expressed concern over its future in his discussions with Democrats.
  The announcement that Ms. Harris would be working to move the bill forward took many on Capitol Hill by surprise. Ms. Harris and Mr. Schumer spoke on Tuesday -- and had plans to hold a follow-up conversation late Wednesday, a White House official said -- but it did not appear Mr. Manchin or Ms. Sinema were given a heads up.
  In a statement, Mr. Schumer said he welcomed Ms. Harris's help navigating into law an elections overhaul that was ''essential to protecting the future of our democracy.''
  Proponents of the voting legislation took her involvement as a sign that their attempts to build pressure not just on lawmakers, but the White House, were being felt.
  ''It's an interesting move given the long odds of anything getting passed and signed into law,'' said James P. Manley, who served as a senior aide to former Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader before Mr. Schumer. ''There's not a lot of cards to play right now, so it shows me they are going to try to raise the public temperature of this thing.''
  Others pointed out that even though Mr. Biden has decades of experience moving legislation through the Senate, Ms. Harris, the first woman and woman of color to hold her role, comes to the issue with an equally valuable perspective as the country grapples with the ways American policies have marginalized and mistreated Black people.
  ''I think that Vice President Harris herself personifies the need for voting rights to be extended,'' the Rev. Al Sharpton, who attended the speech in Tulsa, said in an interview. ''When she's on the phone or walks into an office, we're looking at the reason we need voting rights.''
  Michael Waldman, the president of the Brennan Center for Justice at the New York University School of Law, said that the decision to elevate Ms. Harris as the face of the administration's work on the issue was a pivotal moment for the Biden White House given the number of voter suppression efforts that were moving forward -- 389 bills in 48 states and counting, according to a tracker maintained the Brennan Center.
  ''It has been decades since a Democratic White House has made voting rights and democracy reform a central goal,'' Mr. Waldman said, but he added, ''the clock is ticking.''
  Ms. Harris's impact on the hand-to-hand politics of the Senate is expected to be limited, but she often drew attention to voting rights during her four years as a senator. During her last year in the Senate, Ms. Harris introduced legislation that would expand election security measures, require each state to have early in-person voting periods and allow for an expansion of mail-in absentee ballots.
  In 2020, Ms. Harris was also a co-sponsor of the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, which would restore a piece of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that relied on a formula to identify states with a history of discrimination and require that those jurisdictions clear any changes to their voting processes with the federal government. The protections were eliminated by the Supreme Court in 2013.
  Still, Ms. Harris, who spent a chunk of her time in the Senate running for president, was not known for building especially close relationships with colleagues, and Mr. Manchin and Ms. Sinema are no exceptions.
  Several Democratic aides who work closely with the senators scoffed on Wednesday at the idea that Ms. Harris, known as a staunch liberal, would be the one to persuade either moderate lawmaker to change the filibuster rule. Nor is Ms. Harris a likely candidate to broker the kind of compromise on the substance of the bill needed to persuade Mr. Manchin, the only Democrat who has not sponsored it, to back it.
  Ms. Harris's attempts in February to nudge Mr. Manchin to back the White House's proposed $1.9 trillion coronavirus rescue package are illustrative.
  Mr. Manchin was piqued when Ms. Harris appeared, without warning, on a television affiliate in West Virginia to promote the package before he backed it. Though a Democratic aide familiar with the matter, who asked for anonymity to speak candidly, said the episode was now ''water under the bridge,'' it prompted cleanup by top White House officials.
  Mr. Manchin and Ms. Sinema's offices declined to comment about Ms. Harris's new role.
  Senate Republicans, meanwhile, are doing their best to kill the bill and blunt any Democratic attempt to change the filibuster rule, which would leave their party powerless to stop the passage of sweeping liberal priorities well beyond voting rights.
  At an event in his home state on Wednesday, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the minority leader, argued that Democrats were inflating the impact of new state voting laws in an attempt to justify an unwarranted and chaotic slew of top-down changes to the way states run elections.
  ''What is going on is the Democrats are trying to convince the Senate that states are involved in trying to prevent people from voting in order to pass a total federal takeover in how we conduct elections,'' he told reporters. He said ''not a single member'' of his party supported the bill.
  Aware of the daunting path ahead, allies of the White House said that shepherding the bill through Congress was only one piece of the effort. Ms. Harris could be useful in helping ratchet up pressure on private companies, working with civil rights organizations, and engaging local communities over the importance of registering to vote.
  ''She understands the need to engage in what I'd like to call kind of an 'all of the above approach,''' said Representative Steven Horsford, Democrat of Nevada. ''We can't take anything for granted when we're talking about having people's voice heard at the ballot box.''
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); RIGHT TO VOTE (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); FILIBUSTER (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%); KAMALA HARRIS (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%)
 Geographic: TULSA, OK, USA (56%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 4, 2021

 

End of Document
As Biden Vows to 'Fight Like Heck,' Voting Overhaul Falters in Congress
The New York Times
June 2, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 1695 words
Byline: By Nicholas Fandos
Body




Opposition from Republicans and some of their own senators has left Democrats struggling to determine whether they should try to nix the filibuster to save a top priority.
WASHINGTON -- In the national struggle over voting rights, Democrats have rested their hopes for turning back a wave of new restrictions in Republican-led states and expanding ballot access on their narrow majorities in Congress. Failure, they have repeatedly insisted, ''is not an option.'' 
  But as Republican efforts to clamp down on voting prevail across the country, the drive to enact the most sweeping elections overhaul in generations is faltering in the Senate. With a self-imposed Labor Day deadline for action, Democrats are struggling to unite around a strategy to overcome solid Republican opposition and an almost certain filibuster.
  Republicans in Congress have dug in against the measure, with even the most moderate dismissing it as bloated and overly prescriptive. That leaves Democrats no option for passing it other than to try to force the bill through by destroying the filibuster rule -- which requires 60 votes to put aside any senator's objection -- to pass it on a simple majority, party-line vote.
  Yet Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, the Democrats' decisive swing vote, has repeatedly pledged to protect the filibuster and is refusing to sign on to the voting rights bill. He calls the legislation ''too darn broad'' and too partisan, despite endorsing such proposals in past sessions. Other Democrats also remain uneasy about some of its core provisions.
  In a speech on Tuesday, President Biden vowed to ''fight like heck'' to enact the measure, saying he would ask Vice President Kamala Harris to help push it through.
  ''June should be a month of action on Capitol Hill,'' he said as he commemorated the centennial of the Tulsa race massacre.
  But Mr. Biden alluded to the steep obstacles to that action in Congress, singling out Mr. Manchin and Senator Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona -- a second Democrat who has pledged not to change the filibuster -- without naming them.
  ''I hear all the folks on TV saying, 'Why doesn't Biden get this done?''' the president said. ''Well, because Biden only has a majority of effectively four votes in the House and a tie in the Senate, with two members of the Senate who vote more with my Republican friends.''
  Navigating the 800-page For the People Act, or Senate Bill 1, through an evenly split chamber was never going to be an easy task, even after it passed the House with only Democratic votes. But the Democrats' strategy for moving the measure increasingly hinges on the longest of long shots: persuading Mr. Manchin and the other 49 Democrats to support both the bill and the gutting of the filibuster.
  ''We ought to be able to pass it -- it really would be transformative,'' Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware, said recently. ''But if we have several members of our caucus who have just point-blank said, 'I will not break the filibuster,' then what are we even doing?''
  Summarizing the party's challenge, another Democratic senator who asked to remain anonymous to discuss strategy summed it up this way: The path to passage is as narrow as it is rocky, but Democrats have no choice but to die trying to get across.
  The hand-wringing is likely to only intensify in the coming weeks. On Friday, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, vowed to force a floor debate in late June, testing Mr. Manchin's opposition and laying the groundwork to justify scrapping the filibuster rule.
  ''Hopefully, we can get bipartisan support,'' Mr. Schumer said. ''So far, we have not seen any glimmers on S. 1, and if not, everything is on the table.''
  The stakes, both politically and for the nation's elections, are enormous.
  The bill's failure would allow the enactment of restrictive new voting measures in Republican-led states such as Georgia, Florida and Montana to take effect without legislative challenge. Democrats fear that would empower the Republican Party to pursue a strategy of marginalizing Black and young voters based on former President Donald J. Trump's false claims of election fraud.
  If the measure passed, Democrats could effectively overpower the states by putting in place new national mandates that they set up automatic voter registration, hold regular no-excuse early and mail-in voting, and restore the franchise to felons who have served their terms. The legislation would also end partisan gerrymandering of congressional districts, restructure the Federal Election Commission and require super PACs to disclose their big donors.
  A legion of advocacy groups and civil rights veterans argue that the fight is just starting.
  ''This game isn't done -- we are just gearing up for a floor fight,'' said Tiffany Muller, the president of End Citizens United and Let America Vote, which are spending millions of dollars on television ads in states like West Virginia. ''At the end of the day, every single senator is going to have to make a choice if they are going to vote to uphold the right to vote or uphold an arcane Senate rule. That is the situation that creates the pressure to act.''
  Proponents of the overhaul on and off Capitol Hill have focused their attention for weeks on Mr. Manchin, a centrist who has expressed deep concerns about the consequences of pushing through voting legislation with the support of only one party. So far, they have taken a deliberately hands-off approach, betting that the senator will realize that there is no real compromise to be had with Republicans.
  There is little sign that he has come to that conclusion on his own. Democrats huddled last week in a large conference room atop a Senate office building to discuss the bill, making sure Mr. Manchin was there for an elaborate presentation about why it was vital. Mr. Schumer invited Marc E. Elias, the well-known Democratic election lawyer, to explain in detail the extent of the restrictions being pushed through Republican statehouses around the country. Senators as ideologically diverse as Raphael Warnock of Georgia, a progressive, and Jon Tester of Montana, a centrist, warned what might happen if the party did not act.
  Mr. Manchin listened silently and emerged saying his position had not changed.
  ''I'm learning,'' he told reporters. ''Basically, we're going to be talking and negotiating, talking and negotiating, and talking and negotiating.''
  Despite the intense focus on him, Mr. Manchin is not the only hurdle. Ms. Sinema is a co-sponsor of the election overhaul but has not budged on the filibuster. A handful of other Democrats have shied away from definitive statements but are no less hesitant to do away with the rule.
  ''I'm not to that point yet,'' Mr. Tester said. He also signaled he might be more comfortable modifying the bill, saying he ''wouldn't lose any sleep'' if Democrats dropped a provision that would create a new public campaign financing system for congressional candidates. Republicans have pilloried it.
  ''First of all, we have to figure out if we have all the Democrats on board. Then we have to figure out if we have any Republicans on board,'' Mr. Tester said. ''Then we can answer that question.''
  Republicans are hoping that by banding together, they can doom the measure's prospects. They succeeded in deadlocking a key committee considering the legislation, though their opposition did not bar it from advancing to the full Senate.
  They accuse Democrats of using the voting rights provisions to distract from other provisions in the bill, which they argue are designed to give Democrats lasting political advantages. If they can prevent Mr. Manchin and others from changing their minds on keeping the filibuster, they will have thwarted the entire endeavor.
  ''I don't think they can convince 50 of their members this is the right thing to do,'' said Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri. ''I think it would be hard to explain giving government money to politicians, the partisan F.E.C.''
  In the meantime, Mr. Manchin is pushing the party to embrace what he sees as a more palatable alternative: legislation named after Representative John Lewis of Georgia, the civil rights icon who died last year, that would restore a key provision of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that the Supreme Court struck down in 2013.
  That measure would revive a mandate that states and localities with patterns of discrimination clear election law changes with the federal government in advance.
  In reality, though, that bill has no better chance of becoming law without getting rid of the filibuster. Since the 2013 decision, when the justices asked Congress to send them an updated pre-clearance formula for reinstatement, Republicans have shown little interest in doing so.
  Only one, Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, supports legislation reinstating the voting rights provision in the Senate. Asked recently about the prospect of building more Republican support, Ms. Murkowski pointed out that she had been unable to attract another co-sponsor from her party in the six years since the bill was first introduced.
  Complicating matters, it has yet to actually be reintroduced this term and may not be for months. Because any new enforcement provision would have to pass muster with the courts, Democrats are proceeding cautiously with a series of public hearings.
  All that has created an enormous time crunch. Election lawyers have advised Democrats that they have until Labor Day to make changes for the 2022 elections. Beyond that, they could easily lose control of the House and Senate.
  ''The time clock for this is running out as we approach a midterm election when we face losing the Senate and even the House,'' said Representative Terri A. Sewell, a Democrat who represents the so-called Civil Rights Belt of Alabama and is the lead sponsor of the bill named for Mr. Lewis.
  ''If the vote and protecting the rights of all Americans to exercise that most precious right isn't worth overcoming a procedural filibuster,'' she said, ''then what is?''
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: FILIBUSTER (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); ELECTION REFORM (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (77%); US LABOR DAY (69%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%); KYRSTEN SINEMA (79%); JOE MANCHIN (78%); KAMALA HARRIS (73%)
 Geographic: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: June 2, 2021

 

End of Document
Harris Is Asked to Lead Push To Enact a Voting Rights Bill
The New York Times
June 2, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 714 words
Byline: By Katie Rogers
Body




The vice president has added another, and a politically thorny, problem to her growing portfolio.
WASHINGTON -- President Biden said on Tuesday that he had directed Vice President Kamala Harris to lead Democrats in a sweeping legislative effort to protect voting rights, an issue that is critical to his legacy but one that faces increasingly daunting odds in a divided Senate. 
  ''Today, I'm asking Vice President Harris to help these efforts, and lead them, among her many other responsibilities,'' Mr. Biden said during a trip to Tulsa, Okla. ''With her leadership and your support, we're going to overcome again, I promise you, but it's going to take a hell of a lot of work.''
  The president was in Oklahoma to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Tulsa massacre, when a white mob destroyed a vibrant Black business district and killed as many as 300 people. The massacre was one of the worst outbreaks of racist violence in American history, and it has gone largely ignored in history books.
  Mr. Biden told the crowd that he saw the protection of voting rights as one of the most fundamental -- and most endangered -- pathways to ensure racial equity.
  But his decision to install Ms. Harris as the leader of an effort to beat back bills in states nationwide that are trying to tighten voting rules -- ''a truly unprecedented assault on our democracy, '' Mr. Biden told the crowd -- added another politically thorny problem to the vice president's policy portfolio.
  Ms. Harris has already been tasked with leading the administration's efforts to deter migration to the southwestern border by working to improve conditions in the Northern Triangle countries of Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala. The vice president -- who will visit Mexico and Guatemala next week -- and her staff have worked to reframe expectations around her role, stressing that she will examine the root causes of migration, not single-handedly stop the flow of migrants to the United States.
  Her Northern Triangle work comes in addition to a host of other engagements, including but not limited to: selling the ''American Rescue Plan,'' advocating Mr. Biden's infrastructure package, representing women in the work force, highlighting the Black maternal mortality rate, assisting small businesses, assessing water policy, promoting racial equity, combating vaccine hesitancy, and fighting for a policing overhaul.
  For her part, Ms. Harris embraced the assignment in a statement issued shortly after Mr. Biden's announcement in Tulsa.
  ''In the days and weeks ahead, I will engage the American people, and I will work with voting rights organizations, community organizations, and the private sector to help strengthen and uplift efforts on voting rights nationwide,'' the vice president said. ''And we will also work with members of Congress to help advance these bills.''
  Mr. Biden has focused on issues related to voting rights for much of his career, but the Senate now bears little resemblance to the deal-making chamber he remembers. He faces especially wrenching decisions when it comes to the voting rights legislation he has asked Ms. Harris to help shepherd through Congress.
  Known as the ''For the People Act,'' the bill is the professed No. 1 priority of Democrats this year. It would overhaul the nation's elections system, rein in campaign donations and limit partisan gerrymandering. But after passing the House, it hit a wall of Republican opposition in the Senate.
  One option for Democrats would be to ram the bill through on a partisan vote by further rolling back one of the foundations of Senate tradition: the filibuster. But at least one Democrat, Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, remains opposed to the idea, potentially scuttling it.
  In Tulsa, Mr. Biden seemed to express open frustration at the odds facing the bill -- and at the Democratic lawmakers who may stand in the way of its success.
  ''I hear all the folks on TV saying, 'Why doesn't Biden get this done'?'' the president said. ''Well, because Biden only has a majority of effectively four votes in the House and a tie in the Senate, with two members of the Senate who vote more with my Republican friends,'' a likely swipe at Mr. Manchin and Senator Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, another moderate Democrat.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); RACE & ETHNICITY (88%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%); WOMEN WORKERS (77%); MINORITY BUSINESS ASSISTANCE (76%); HATE CRIME (74%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (74%); HISTORY (73%); RACIAL JUSTICE (73%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); SMALL BUSINESS ASSISTANCE (71%); VACCINES (69%); ANNIVERSARIES (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (61%); DEATH RATES (50%)
 Industry: VACCINES (69%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%); KAMALA HARRIS (79%)
 Geographic: TULSA, OK, USA (93%); OKLAHOMA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (94%); GUATEMALA (92%); EL SALVADOR (79%); HONDURAS (79%)
 Load-Date: June 2, 2021

 

End of Document
‘The Point Was to Win,’ Barack Obama Writes; Ezra Klein
The New York Times 
June 3, 2021 Thursday 09:17 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1987 words
Byline: Ezra Klein
Highlight: He isn’t afraid of being a politician.
Body




“My entire politics is premised on the fact that we are these tiny organisms on this little speck floating in the middle of space,” Barack Obama told me, sitting in his office in Washington.
I was the one who had introduced the cosmic scale, asking how proof of alien life would change his politics. But Obama, in a philosophical mood, used the question to trace his view of humanity. “The differences we have on this planet are real,” he said. “They’re profound. And they cause enormous tragedy as well as joy. But we’re just a bunch of humans with doubts and confusion. We do the best we can. And the best thing we can do is treat each other better, because we’re all we got.”
How Obama navigated the differences we have on this planet is the primary topic of “A Promised Land,” the first volume of his presidential memoirs. One passage, in particular, had stuck in my mind for weeks. Obama is reflecting on the Tea Party uprising, and the thrumming undercurrent of racism that powered it. He recalls the din of cable news chatter debating the Tea Party’s true nature, and the pressure that built for him to render his presidential verdict. He admits that his White House wanted nothing to do with this debate, in part because it had “reams of data telling us that white voters, including many who supported me, reacted poorly to lectures about race.”
I’m going to quote what Obama writes next at length:
More practically, I saw no way to sort out people’s motives, especially given that racial attitudes were woven into every aspect of our nation’s history. Did that Tea Party member support “states’ rights” because he genuinely thought it was the best way to promote liberty, or because he continued to resent how federal intervention had led to an end to Jim Crow, desegregation, and rising Black political power in the South? Did that conservative activist oppose any expansion of the social welfare state because she believed it sapped individual initiative, or because she was convinced that it would benefit only brown people who’d just crossed the border? Whatever my instincts might tell me, whatever truths the history books might suggest, I knew I wasn’t going to win over any voters by labeling my opponents racist.
The poet Robert Frost famously said that “a liberal is a man too broad-minded to take his own side in a quarrel.” This is not quite true of Obama, but it is nearly true of his authorial style. “A Promised Land,” which covers the first half of his presidency, is not 700 pages long because it limns so many events. It’s 700 pages long because it presents so many different views of Obama and his motivations.
Over and over again, Obama tries to make clear that his assailants have a point, that his perspective is bounded by experience and self-interest. This is true in his personal recollections, which give ample space to Michelle Obama’s doubts about his decision to pursue a political career, and it is true in his political remembrances, which always try to inhabit his critics&#39; arguments, or at least their sentiments.
But what strikes me about that passage is that you can see Obama’s idealism and calculation shimmer into a single point. After suggesting that the motivations of his Tea Party critics were unknowable, he resolves the argument by saying the politics of it were thoroughly knowable. Whatever his own intuitions might tell him — whatever “truths the history books might suggest” — to cry racism, or even to coolly point it out, was to lose votes, and neither his version of hope nor of change would be helped along by defeat.
In our national story, Obama is framed as a practitioner of a kind of anti-politics — an almost naïvely optimistic figure who rose to power downplaying our divisions only to find his administration’s legacy swallowed by them. But his book is a reminder that the inverse story has always been just as true: Obama is thoroughly a politician, and because he understood the depth of our divisions, he treated them gingerly, at times fearfully. In a particularly striking moment, Obama reveals that across the entirety of his presidency, his single largest drop in white support came when he criticized the white police officer who arrested Henry Louis Gates Jr., a Black Harvard professor, on the porch of his own home. “It was support that I’d never completely get back,” Obama writes.
Much in our politics is not what it seems. Contrary to the aesthetics of our current political debate, there is a deep optimism in the confrontational politics of the modern left and a quiet pessimism in the caution with which Obama speaks. To ask the question bluntly: Who truly believes America to be a racist country? The political voices who state that view clearly, because they think Americans can be challenged into change, or the ones who try to avoid even implying the thought, because they fear the power of the backlash?
When I brought up that passage about the Tea Party, Obama was frank in describing his calculations. “One of the ways I would measure it would be: Is it more important for me to tell a basic, historical truth, let’s say about racism in America right now? Or is it more important for me to get a bill passed that provides a lot of people with health care that didn’t have it before?” He admitted that there was “a psychic cost to not always just telling the truth,” and fondly referenced the “Key &amp; Peele” skits about Luther, his anger translator. But he didn’t worry over whether he’d been wrong to bite his tongue.
One thing that occurred to me as we were talking is that Obama’s view of his own political situation echoes the current reality of the Democratic Party. Barack Hussein Obama, a Black man running for office during the era of the War on Terror, understood the deck was stacked against him. If he was going to win, he would need the support of people inclined to view him with suspicion. He would need to not just speak to their hopes, but to defuse their fears. To hear Obama tell it, those fears were not just that too much change would come too fast, but that those who fought that change, or just worried over it, would be judged or cast out.
“People knew I was left on issues like race, or gender equality, and L.G.B.T.Q. issues and so forth,” Obama told me. “But I think maybe the reason I was successful campaigning in downstate Illinois, or Iowa, or places like that is they never felt as if I was condemning them for not having gotten to the politically correct answer quick enough, or that somehow they were morally suspect because they had grown up with and believed more traditional values.”
Democrats, too, face an unforgiving context: Their coalition leans young, urban and diverse, while America’s turnout patterns and electoral geography favor the old, rural and white. According to FiveThirtyEight, Republicans hold a 3.5 point advantage in the Electoral College, a 5-point advantage in the Senate and a 2-point advantage in the House. Even after winning many more votes than Republicans in 2018 and 2020, Democrats are at a 50-50 split in the Senate and have a bare four-seat majority in the House. Odds are that they will lose the House and possibly the Senate in 2022.
This is the fundamental asymmetry of American politics right now: To hold national power, Democrats need to win voters who are right of center; Republicans do not need to win voters who are left of center. Even worse, Republicans control the election laws and redistricting processes in 23 states, while Democrats control 15. The ongoing effort by Texas Republicans to tilt the voting laws in their favor, even as national Republicans stonewall the For The People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, is testament to the consequences of that imbalance.
Most Democrats I know are panicked over the convergence of their geographic disadvantage and the Republican assault on democracy. In my view, they’re right to be. Their situation is dire, and if the Republican Party could reorient itself around more competent candidates, it could become catastrophic. Obama has argued that Senate Democrats should abolish the filibuster and pass the legislation necessary to protect American democracy. I wish they’d listen to him on that. But as of now, the Democrats’ democracy agenda is imperiled, and so are they.
In our conversation, Obama gamely tried to suggest that there was a bright side to the Democrats’ structural disadvantage. “That does mean Democratic politics is going to be different than Republican politics,” he told me. “Now, look, the good news is, I also think that has made the Democratic Party more empathetic, more thoughtful, wiser by necessity. We have to think about a broader array of interests and people. And that’s my vision for how America ultimately works best and perfects its union.”
In other words, the Democratic Party, like Obama, has been forced into a more pluralistic form of politics by its geographic disadvantages. The 2016 and 2020 elections tell the tale. The Republican Party reacted to Obama by indulging its rage and nominating Donald Trump and won the presidency despite losing the popular vote. The Democratic Party responded to Trump by strategically nominating the candidate they thought had the best chance of winning over Trump voters, Joe Biden, and came perilously close to losing the presidency despite dominating the popular vote.
Toward the end of our conversation, I asked Obama if he still believed you could change people’s politics through policy. He replied with the central what-if of the last decade. “Let’s say a Joe Biden or, the person who was running, Hillary Clinton, had immediately succeeded me, and the economy suddenly has 3 percent unemployment, I think we would have consolidated the sense that, oh, actually these policies that Obama put in place worked,” he said. “The fact that Trump interrupts essentially the continuation of our policies, but still benefits from the economic stability and growth that we had initiated, means people aren’t sure.”
Biden is “essentially finishing the job,” Obama told me. We’ll see. If Joe Biden and the Democrats pass H.R.1 and some version of the American Families and Jobs Plans, then the Obama-Biden approach to politics will have proven itself out. But if they fail to pass H.R.1 or the American Families and Jobs Plans, and then lose the House and Senate in 2022, how open will liberals be to hearing about the virtues of more candidates in the Obama lineage? Not very, I suspect. Coalitions are less emotionally satisfying than confrontations; pluralism doesn’t go nearly as viral as division. The politicians who preach the harder path have to be able to deliver.
Obama knew this full well. “The point was to win,” he writes. “I wanted to prove to Blacks, to whites — to Americans of all colors — that we could transcend the old logic, that we could rally a working majority around a progressive agenda, that we could place issues like inequality or lack of educational opportunity at the very center of the national debate and then actually deliver the goods.”
This is another way in which the reality of our politics defies the aesthetics of our politicians. The true agents of Democratic radicalization right now aren’t leftists in the House but senators like Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, who by indulging Republican obstructionism and preferring the preservation of the filibuster to the protection of democracy, are imperiling the entire theory of politics they claim to support.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (91%); LIFE FORMS (90%); POLITICS (90%); RACE & ETHNICITY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); TEA PARTY MOVEMENT (89%); BOOK REVIEWS (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WRITERS (78%); LITERATURE (73%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (73%); VOTERS & VOTING (73%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (72%); Obama, Barack (%); Books and Literature (%); A Promised Land (Book) (%); Content Type: Personal Profile (%); Race and Ethnicity (%); Democratic Party (%); Republican Party (%); United States Politics and Government (%)
 Industry: BOOK REVIEWS (78%); WRITERS (78%)
 Person: BARACK OBAMA (93%); Obama, Barack
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)
 Load-Date: June 4, 2021

 

End of Document
Why I Am Not Vaccinated
The New York Times
May 14, 2021 Friday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22; LETTERS
Length: 387 words
Body




To the Editor: 
  Re ''Our Herd Immunity Failure,'' by David Brooks (column, May 7):
  I am one of the people who was interviewed and quoted in Derek Thompson's Atlantic piece about Americans who are declining the vaccine, which Mr. Brooks discusses.
  I take issue with Mr. Brooks's unflattering portrayal of us as a group of individuals who have failed to consider our obligation to society. I was a public defender in New York City for over eight years, a career I chose because I wanted to help the most powerless. I am currently an attorney at a civil liberties nonprofit.
  I strongly disagreed with the response of governments and communities throughout the world to the coronavirus crisis, because I believe that the measures implemented did little to reduce deaths from the virus, while they inflicted substantial harm, particularly on the most vulnerable: the poor, minorities, children and individuals suffering from depression and other mental illnesses, to name a few groups.
  With respect to my own decision not to get the vaccine, I had Covid in February, and therefore almost certainly am immune to infection.
  We cannot move forward in this polarized climate when we paint anyone who disagrees with us as selfish or unequivocally misguided. Perhaps my choice will prove wrong over the course of time. However, no one can accurately say that it was made without considering my obligation to others, or all sides of the equation.
  Jenin YounesWashington
  How G.O.P. Poll Watchers Can Suppress the Vote
  To the Editor:
  ''Republicans Aim to Expand Power of Poll Watchers'' (front page, May 2) aptly details the potential for poll watchers to intimidate voters and poll workers, but doesn't mention one big reason many Republicans push the tactic.
  Poll watchers can disenfranchise many citizens without challenging a single voter successfully. Each challenge to a voter's legitimacy lengthens the wait for people in line and deters others from joining the queue.
  Long lines are a powerful and often deliberate form of voter suppression. This is one more reason we must demand that senators pass the For the People Act, with its measures to protect early voting, minimize voting lines and stop Election Day thuggery against people of color.
               
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Letter
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: COVID CORONAVIRUS (90%); DISEASE IMMUNITY (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); VACCINES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (86%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); VIRUSES (77%); ELECTIONS (75%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); CORONAVIRUSES (74%); DEMOCRACIES (74%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (73%); WRITERS (73%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (70%); RACE & ETHNICITY (69%); MINORITY GROUPS (68%); DEPRESSION (67%); MENTAL ILLNESS (67%); ELECTION WORKERS (64%)
 Industry: VACCINES (90%); WRITERS (73%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (70%)
 Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: May 14, 2021

 

End of Document
A key Senate panel deadlocked on Democrats’ election overhaul, signaling a murky path ahead.
The New York Times 
May 11, 2021 Tuesday 21:24 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 727 words
Byline: Nicholas Fandos
Highlight: The tie vote in the Rules Committee set up a showdown over the landmark voting rights expansion on the Senate floor in the months ahead. Republicans have vowed to stop it.
Body




The tie vote in the Rules Committee set up a showdown over the landmark voting rights expansion on the Senate floor in the months ahead. Republicans have vowed to stop it.
A key Senate committee deadlocked on Tuesday over Democrats’ sweeping proposed elections overhaul, setting the stage for a showdown on the Senate floor in the coming months that could determine the future of voting rights and campaign rules across the country.
The tie vote by the Senate Rules Committee, with nine Democrats in favor and nine Republicans opposed, does not prevent Democrats from moving forward with the 800-page legislation, known as the For the People Act. Proponents of the bill hailed it as an important step toward adopting far-reaching federal changes to blunt the restrictive new voting laws emerging in Republican-led battlegrounds like Georgia and Florida.
But the action unavoidably thrust a set of thorny questions into Democrats’s laps about how to proceed with an issue they view as a pressing civil rights fight with sweeping implications for democracy and their party. The bill as written faces near-impossible odds in the Senate, where Republicans are expected to block it using a filibuster and at least one Democrat, Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, remains opposed.
With their control in Washington fleeting and Republicans states racing ahead with their own laws, Democrats must now decide how to reach consensus among themselves on the measure, and whether to attempt to destroy or significantly alter the filibuster to salvage its chances of becoming law.
“Here in the 21st century, we are witnessing an attempt at the greatest contraction of voting rights since the end of Reconstruction and the beginning of Jim Crow,” Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the majority leader, said at the session’s outset, calling the debate a “legacy defining choice.”
He cited a new law in Iowa restricting early and mail-in voting, another in Florida cutting back on the use of drop boxes and making it harder to vote by mail, and in Georgia, where Democrats have attacked the decision to bar third parties from giving water or snacks to voters waiting in long lines.
Among other changes, the Democrats’ bill would essentially overwrite some of these recent state laws by requiring each state implement 15 days of early voting, no-excuse vote by mail programs — like the ones many states expanded during the pandemic — and automatic and same-day voter registration. The legislation also would restore voting rights to former felons and neutralize restrictive state voter identification laws that Democrats say can make it harder for minorities to vote.
“These laws carry the stench of oppression, the smell of bigotry,” Mr. Schumer said to Republicans. “Are you going to stamp it out, or are you going to spread it?”
The attacks may help galvanize public support for Democrats’ cause, but over 8 hours of debate, the clash only served to highlight how vast philosophical differences over elections themselves have come to divide the two parties in the shadow of Donald J. Trump’s fallacious attack on the 2020 contest.
Republicans gave no indication they were willing to cede any ground to Democrats in a fight that now stretches from the Capitol in Washington to state houses across the country. Instead, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky argued Democrats were merely using state laws as a fig leaf to justify an unnecessary and self-serving federal power “cooked up at the Democratic National Committee.”
“Our democracy is not in crisis, and we’re not going to let one party take over our democracy under the false pretense of saving it,” Mr. McConnell said.
He and other Republicans on the committee were careful to sidestep many of Mr. Trump’s outlandish claims of fraud, which have taken deep root in the party, prompting the Jan. 6 assault on the Capitol and giving ammunition to state lawmakers that have adjusted their election laws. But Mr. Trump, who still towers over the party, made it unavoidable, calling for every state to follow suit “so we never again have an election rigged and stolen from us.”
“The people are demanding real reform!” he said in a statement.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); FILIBUSTER (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RIGHT TO VOTE (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); ELECTION LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); MAIL-IN VOTING (89%); POLITICS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); VOTER DISQUALIFICATION (78%); VOTER REGISTRATION (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (73%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (70%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (60%); Senate Committee on Rules and Administration (%); Democratic Party (%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Georgia (%)
 Person: CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); JOE MANCHIN (58%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (92%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)
 Load-Date: May 11, 2021

 

End of Document
How Chuck Schumer Plans to Win Over Trump Voters
The New York Times 
April 30, 2021 Friday 20:08 EST

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 366 words
Byline: ‘The Ezra Klein Show’
Highlight: The Senate majority leader also discusses the filibuster, Joe Manchin and Democrats’ plan for 2022.
Body




In his 100 days address this week, Joe Biden outlined his plans for a big, bold legislative agenda to come. He previewed a two-pronged economic package: the $2.25 trillion American Jobs Plan and the $1.8 trillion American Families Plan. He spoke about the need to pass universal background checks for firearms, comprehensive immigration reform, and the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act.
[You can listen to this episode of “The Ezra Klein Show” on Apple, Spotify, Google or wherever you get your podcasts.]
The success of that agenda hinges on whether 50 Senate Democrats — ranging from Bernie Sanders to Joe Manchin — can come together and pass legislation. They don’t have a single vote to spare. And the person responsible for making that happen is the New York senator and Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer.
Schumer has a theory of politics that he believes can hold or even win Democrats seats in 2022. It’s not a complicated theory: For Democrats to win over middle-of-the-road voters — including those who voted for Donald Trump — they need to prove that government is actually helping them. But to do that, the government needs to actually help those voters, in clear and visible ways. That means passing big, bold legislation. And the institution Schumer leads — the Senate — is the primary obstacle to that happening.
So I invited Schumer on the show to talk about how exactly he plans on doing that. How do you win over Trump voters? What kinds of economic policies can help deliver Democrats victory in 2022? How should the party approach topics like race and gender? How will he pass bills, like the For The People Act, that can’t go through budget reconciliation? And, of course, what do you do about the filibuster?

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Web Publication
 Subject: POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); FILIBUSTER (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (77%); TRANSCRIPTS (77%); ECONOMIC POLICY (73%); IMMIGRATION LAW (73%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (73%); IMMIGRATION (56%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%); FACT CHECKING (50%); Schumer, Charles E (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Democratic Party (%); Senate (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Trump, Donald J (%)
 Company: GOOGLE LLC (57%)
 Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%); INTERNET BROADCASTING (89%); WEBSITES & PORTALS (89%); ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (77%); WEB SEARCH PORTALS (77%); SEARCH ENGINES (72%); PODCASTING (70%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (93%); JOE BIDEN (93%); CHARLES SCHUMER (90%); BERNIE SANDERS (78%); GEORGE FLOYD (73%); JOE MANCHIN (73%); Schumer, Charles E; Biden, Joseph R Jr; Trump, Donald J
 Geographic: NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: June 1, 2021

 

End of Document
G.O.P. Intensifies Nationwide Push to Restrict Vote
The New York Times
May 1, 2021 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1640 words
Byline: By Nick Corasaniti and Reid J. Epstein
Body




Republican lawmakers are marching ahead to overhaul voting systems in states where they control the government, frustrating Democrats and even some G.O.P. election officials. Next up: Texas.
The pleas from Florida election officials were direct and dire: Passing the state's new voting bill would be a ''grave security risk,'' ''unnecessary'' and a ''travesty.'' 
  The restrictions imposed by the new law, they warned, would make it harder to vote and hurt confidence in the balloting process.
  But their objections were brushed aside on Thursday night as the Legislature gave final passage to a bill that would limit voting by mail, curtail the use of drop boxes and prohibit actions to help people waiting in line to vote, among other restrictions, while imposing penalties on those who do not follow the rules. It was perhaps the clearest sign yet that Republicans are determined to march forward across state capitols to establish new restrictions on voting.
  The Republican effort puts added pressure on Democrats in Congress to find a way to pass federal voting laws, including a sweeping overhaul known as the For the People Act. But in Washington, just as in state capitols across the country, Republicans have remained united and steadfast against the Democratic efforts.
  Georgia Republicans in March enacted far-reaching new voting laws that limit ballot drop-boxes and forbid the distribution of food and water to voters waiting in line. Iowa has also imposed new limits, including reducing the period for early voting and in-person voting hours on Election Day.
  Next up is Texas, where Republicans in the legislature are trampling protestations from corporate titans like Dell Technologies and American Airlines and moving on a vast election bill that would be among the most severe in the nation. It would impose new restrictions on early voting, ban drive-through voting, threaten election officials with harsher penalties and greatly empower partisan poll watchers. The main bill passed a key committee in a late-night session on Thursday, and could head to a full floor vote in the House as early as next week.
  Bills to restrict voting have also been moving through Republican-led legislatures in Arizona and Michigan.
  Throughout the process, Republican legislators have been largely unmoved by opposition to new voting laws by Fortune 500 companies, major American sports leagues, Black faith leaders and elections administrators. Nor has the lack of popular support for many of the bills deterred them. Even as some of the more strident initial proposals have been watered down, there has rarely been a pause, even for a moment, in the drive to pass new legislation on voting.
  ''I don't think anybody was concerned about it,'' Joe Gruters, a Florida state senator and the chairman of the Republican Party of Florida, said of outside criticism.
  Tightening his state's election laws, Mr. Gruters has said, is a top priority not just of Republican lawmakers but also of the party's base. Though he characterized Florida's election system as a national ''gold standard'' and said he wasn't aware of any fraud in the 2020 election, Mr. Gruters said in a phone interview on Friday that his state's voting could always be improved.
  ''It's just like when the Tampa Bay Bucs won the Super Bowl -- they're still making improvements and signing new players,'' he said.
  A representative for Gov. Ron DeSantis said on Friday that he ''is supportive'' of the Florida bill, and he is widely expected to sign it. But state election officials were still protesting the measure on Friday morning, barely 12 hours after it had passed.
  The group representing Florida election supervisors issued a statement lamenting the new limits on voting by mail, saying the changes would make it ''harder'' to cast a mail ballot. ''After days of debate, our hope is that the initial and unnecessary call for election reform will not detract from the confidence that was well-earned in 2020,'' Craig Latimer, the head of the group, said in the statement.
  The unrelenting push by Republicans to roll back voting access has left Democrats exasperated. In an emotional floor speech before the final vote in Florida on Thursday night, State Representative Angela Nixon of Jacksonville both pleaded with her colleagues to vote against the bill and chastised those supporting it.
  ''It's very frustrating, and it's super hard to be in this chamber, and to be cool with people and cordial with people who are making policies that are detrimental to our communities,'' said Ms. Nixon, her voice shaking at times.
  The fixation on voting laws reflects how central the issue has become to the Republican Party, driven by a base that still adheres to former President Donald J. Trump's false claims that the 2020 election was stolen from him. Pledges to ensure voting integrity have become common in political ads and stump speeches, and opposition to the federal voting rights bills in Congress is universal among Republican members.
  A number of Republicans running for office in 2022 have begun campaigns with messaging that pushes the false narrative that the nation's voting systems are flawed. They include Representative Ted Budd of North Carolina, who on Wednesday announced a Senate bid with a three-minute video in which he called for fair and secure elections, adopting Republicans' rationale for revamping the voting laws.
  In a political era in which partisan primaries are often the only challenge a candidate faces, the party's base has become a chief driver of legislative action. A CNN poll released on Friday found that while 97 percent of Democrats believed President Biden ''legitimately won enough votes to win the presidency,'' 70 percent of Republicans surveyed said he did not.
  And polling from Quinnipiac University in April found that a vast majority of Republicans -- 78 percent -- were opposed to expanding vote by mail, and 84 percent believed that voter fraud was a greater threat than voter suppression. (Numerous audits, court cases and reports have found no significant fraud in the 2020 election.)
  Republicans have been largely dismissive of the business community's objections to new voting restrictions, part of a longer-running split between the parties and local chambers of commerce that began when corporations vocally opposed laws enacted by Republican-run states in the 2010s that sought to protect businesses from having to recognize same-sex marriage.
  An array of corporations also denounced the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol and said they would not donate to Republican members of Congress who voted to overturn the election results. That threat didn't sway most lawmakers from their fealty to Mr. Trump, and in the weeks since the attack, some companies have pulled back from that pledge.
  Indeed, some Republicans have turned public opposition from major businesses and outside entities into a political weapon; rather than seek to appease businesses, lawmakers have instead taunted them, castigating corporate activism and daring businesses to act.
  ''Major League Baseball caved to fear and lies from liberal activists,'' Gov. Brian Kemp of Georgia announced the day after the decision by Major League Baseball to move its All-Star Game from Atlanta. Free and fair elections, he said, ''are worth the threats.'' He added, ''They are worth the boycotts, as well as the lawsuits. I want to be clear: I will not be backing down from this fight.''
  Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick of Texas was just as firm. ''Texans are fed up with corporations that don't share our values trying to dictate public policy,'' he said after American Airlines released a statement denouncing one of the voting bills in the state. ''The majority of Texans support maintaining the integrity of our elections, which is why I made it a priority this legislative session.''
  Republicans not in thrall to Mr. Trump see the standoff with businesses as an ominous sign. ''We say the party has gone full Trump, but what we mean is the party has gone full populist and nationalist,'' said Michael Wood, an anti-Trump Republican running in Saturday's 23-candidate special election to Congress in the Dallas suburbs. ''We've turned away from our roots as a pro-business party, a pro-small business party, and that, if we don't correct course, is going to be really bad for America.''
  Yet Republicans are also seizing on a potential political opportunity. The aftermath of the 2020 election, and Mr. Trump's insistence that the vote was rigged, provided the party with the first major public support from its partisans to pursue new voting legislation, after the Supreme Court hollowed out the Voting Rights Act in 2013.
  Indeed, many of the laws being proposed and passed by Republicans would most likely have been challenged by the Justice Department under what was known as the preclearance provision in Section 5 of the act.
  ''We saw something like this in 2010 after Obama got elected,'' said Myrna Pérez, the director of the Voting Rights and Elections Program at the Brennan Center for Justice. ''But we had more of a pushback and were able to block or blunt many of those laws. Now there's not the kind of guardrails that we had in the past, and voters are suffering because of it.''
  Mr. Wood, the Texas Republican running in Saturday's special election, worries that this could drive away supporters.
  ''It's keeping Republicans from talking honestly to themselves about why we're getting a smaller and smaller share of the vote in Texas,'' he said. ''We can either have that conversation, or keep screaming about quote unquote 'election integrity' and watch the state become progressively more Democratic.''
  That debate could well be decided soon when the Texas Legislature takes up its own voting bill.
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: News
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); VOTERS & VOTING (91%); ELECTION LAW (90%); ELECTION WORKERS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); PARTISANSHIP (79%); BALLOTS (78%); FINES & PENALTIES (76%); MAIL-IN VOTING (73%); SPORTS & RECREATION (50%)
 Company:  AMERICAN AIRLINES INC (53%)
 Industry: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (53%); AIRLINES (89%)
 Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (93%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)
 Load-Date: May 4, 2021

 

End of Document
