
Democracy's Near-Death Experience
The New York Times
December 2, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 1016 words
Byline: By Susan E. Rice
Body




Now is no time for complacency. The next Congress must shore up our institutions.
It appears that our democracy dodged a bullet -- or, more precisely, multiple concerted efforts by the president of the United States to torpedo its very foundations. 
  While President Trump rages relentlessly about election ''fraud,'' many Republican leaders continue to parrot false denials of the validity of President-elect Joe Biden's clear victory. Yet, so far, our democracy has withstood the greatest stress test of our lifetimes.
  Mr. Trump and his political allies have been employing nearly every weapon at their disposal to try to retain the White House, notwithstanding the will of the people.
  First, the Trump campaign labored (largely in vain) to concoct bogus conspiracy theories to discredit Mr. Biden by falsely smearing his son Hunter. To do so, Mr. Trump and his associates solicited foreign assistance from Ukraine and China and relied on Russian agents to disseminate disinformation.
  Second, Trump supporters worked assiduously to suppress the vote by denigrating the legitimacy of mail-in ballots during a pandemic, limiting access to ballot drop-boxes and polling stations, flooding social media with messaging to dampen minority voter turnout, blasting robocalls to deceive voters about where and when to vote and manipulating the postal system to delay ballot delivery.
  Third, some of Mr. Trump's most ardent supporters intimidated voters at the polls. Heeding calls to ''stand by'' and ''go into the polls and watch very carefully,'' they deployed, sometimes armed, in Black and brown communities under the guise of ensuring no fraudulent votes were cast.
  Fourth, in the run-up to Election Day, Mr. Trump dispatched an army of litigants to enlist the courts in curtailing access to the polls. Since the election, his legal team has tried repeatedly to halt ballot counting and toss out legitimately cast votes that most likely favored Mr. Biden. Ultimately, Mr. Trump summoned Michigan's Republican leaders to the White House, apparently in an attempt to coax the state's Legislature into unilaterally appointing Trump electors.
  Despite these machinations, the worst fears about this election failed to materialize. Defying the combined challenges of the pandemic, a chaotic primary season, foreign interference and presidential sabotage, the 2020 election proved to be one of the cleanest and, according to senior U.S. officials, the ''most secure'' in our nation's history. The American people voted in unprecedented numbers, risking their health and foiling efforts in many states to make voting as difficult as possible. African-Americans, especially, braved countless barriers to casting their ballots.
  There is no proof, nor even credible evidence, of significant voting irregularities, much less fraud. Republican and Democratic state and local officials largely adhered to their legal responsibilities, conducting the tabulation and certification processes honestly and transparently. Federal officials, sometimes collaborating with the private sector, effectively minimized the impact of Russian electoral interference.
  The mainstream media duly prepared the public for a protracted counting process, refrained from rushing to call the outcomes in key states and resisted amplifying false allegations of fraud, thereby helping to temper public anxiety.
  There has been no significant election-related violence. Supporters of Mr. Biden celebrated joyously, while supporters of Mr. Trump protested a week later without major incident.
  Countries around the world have accepted the result, almost uniformly congratulating Mr. Biden on his decisive victory, with many expressing eagerness to renew relations with the United States.
  For now, our democracy has held.
  Still, the lesson we must learn is not a reassuring one: A determined autocrat in the White House poses a grave threat to our democratic institutions and can severely undermine faith in our elections, particularly when backed by partisans in Congress.
  Perhaps only when the stars are optimally aligned -- when voters turn out in huge numbers, when the outcome is not close, when state and local officials and the courts adhere to the rule of law, when foreign interference is thwarted, when the media behaves responsibly and when people remain peaceful -- can our democracy endure its greatest tests.
  Mr. Trump will leave office on Jan. 20, whether he acknowledges defeat or not. Yet, if his Republican enablers in Congress retain a Senate majority, they will not hesitate to reprise the politics of power at any cost, even by again subverting the democratic process.
  So, bolstering our democracy depends in large part on the people of Georgia voting out their incumbent senators on Jan. 5. If the Senate flips to Democratic control, Congress will be able to apply the lessons of our democracy's near-death experience.
  It would enact the For the People Act to combat corruption, strengthen ethics rules and improve voter access as well as the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act to restore the protections of the 1965 legislation. Congress would pass the Protecting Our Democracy Act to constrain the power of future presidents who deem themselves above the law and finally adopt long-stalled legislation to shore up our election infrastructure against adversaries, foreign or domestic.
  Now is no time for self-congratulation or complacency. We must act with the unique urgency and courage of those who know they are living on borrowed time.
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Op-Ed
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); BALLOTS (77%); CONSPIRACY (77%); ELECTION FRAUD (77%); MAIL-IN VOTING (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (77%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (77%); EVIDENCE (74%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (67%); SOCIAL MEDIA (66%); CONSPIRACY THEORY (54%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (53%); HISTORY (50%)
 Industry: POSTAL SERVICE (66%); SOCIAL MEDIA (66%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%)
 Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); UKRAINE (79%)
 Load-Date: December 2, 2020

 

End of Document
Looking for Better Ways to Run Elections
The New York Times
November 28, 2020 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22; LETTERS
Length: 631 words
Body




A reader endorses a bill that includes automatic voter registration. Another says we should keep our electoral system decentralized. Also: A broader view of education; the flag isn't partisan.
To the Editor: 
  Re ''Our Voting Rules, Different in Every State,'' by Charlotte Hill and Lee Drutman (Op-Ed, Nov. 6), about the need to establish a federal elections agency:
  As experts posit how to rebuild our democracy and expand voting rights, we should spotlight an existing piece of legislation that can achieve these goals: H.R. 1, or the For the People Act. As the article notes, the bill would be ''transformative.''
  Speaker Nancy Pelosi has renewed her commitment to pass this legislation. It would establish automatic voter registration for all voters, require states to adopt independent redistricting commissions and ensure a period of at least 15 days of early voting for federal elections in all 50 states.
  (Its passage in the Senate is uncertain, with control still undecided.)
  These are structural reforms to our broken election system, expanding voter access and countering the malicious efforts of voter suppression that have disenfranchised communities of color for decades.
  The next administration and Congress should look no further than the reforms outlined in H.R. 1 to jump-start this process of ensuring that all Americans can have their voices heard.
  Jana MorganWashingtonThe writer is director of the Declaration for American Democracy, a coalition of interest groups.
  To the Editor:
  The writers advocate a single ''federal elections agency to ensure that the voting process is fair, consistent, secure and legitimate.'' Under our current system, in order to corrupt the entire electoral system you must corrupt the systems in 50 states and Washington, D.C. I see that decentralization as a strength, not a weakness.
  No matter how carefully you design such a system to guarantee its independence, the executive branch will inevitably gain more and more influence over it. I believe that the best way to ensure the legitimacy of our electoral system is to keep it decentralized.
  It's messy, it's inefficient, but that's what you get with democracy.
  Carl SchroederOlympia, Wash.
  Education Isn't 'Elitist'
  To the Editor:
  Re ''No President Can Solve Our Deepest Problems,'' by Yuval Levin (Op-Ed, Nov. 4):
  The origins of the seething anger at the heart of our national divide must be properly understood, not simply railed at, if we have any hope of healing it. Mr. Levin's article is well meaning but impractical. People are not going to suddenly begin cooperating with one another when attitudes, as they currently exist, are diametrically opposed.
  When, thankfully, Joe Biden is inaugurated, he and his administration must make clear to the country that education is not ''elitist,'' nor does it necessarily mean ''college.'' It means ''knowledge.'' Education for a trade is as worthy as education for a white-collar profession. The country needs plumbers, machinists and electricians more than the flood of M.B.A.s we have.
  I have an Ivy League education but spent the majority of my working life in law enforcement. It was extremely gratifying. We need to verbalize and demonstrate our respect for all if we hope to bridge this terrible chasm in our land.
  MacKenzie AllenSanta Fe, N.M.
  What the Flag Means to Us
  To the Editor:
  Re ''Flying the Flag Again'' (letter, Nov. 13):
  The American flag is not a partisan symbol. We, devout Democrats, raised a flag at the front of our home because we believe in the country and its ideals, not in a person or a party.
  We all own the flag; no one is obligated to fly it. Ceding the flag to a particular political view diminishes the power of the Stars and Stripes.
  Jonathan KremerEllie KremerVentnor, N.J.
              
Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Letter
 Publication-Type: Newspaper
 Subject: ELECTIONS (91%); VOTERS & VOTING (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PARTISANSHIP (90%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (90%); VOTER REGISTRATION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (89%); US ELECTORAL COLLEGE (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); RIGHT TO VOTE (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); WRITERS (77%); REDISTRICTING (73%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (73%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (73%); CORRUPTION (63%); BIDEN'S FIRST 100 DAYS (60%)
 Industry: WRITERS (77%)
 Person: JOE BIDEN (79%); NANCY PELOSI (58%)
 Geographic: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)
 Load-Date: November 28, 2020

 

End of Document
Why Are Republicans So Afraid of Voters?
The New York Times 
November 1, 2020 Sunday 10:58 EST

 Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1681 words
Byline: The Editorial Board
Highlight: There is no “both sides do it” when it comes to intentionally keeping Americans away from the polls.
Body




There is no “both sides do it” when it comes to intentionally keeping Americans away from the polls.
As of Sunday afternoon, more than 93 million Americans had cast a ballot in the November elections. That’s about two-thirds of the total number of people who voted in 2016, and there are still two days until Election Day.
This is excellent news. In the middle of a global pandemic that has taken the lives of nearly a quarter of a million Americans, upended the national economy and thrown state election procedures into turmoil, there were reasonable concerns that many people would not vote at all. The numbers to date suggest that 2020 could see record turnout.
While celebrating this renewed citizen involvement in America’s political process, don’t lose sight of the bigger, and darker, picture. For decades, Americans have voted at depressingly low rates for a modern democracy. Even in a “good” year, more than one-third of all eligible voters don’t cast a ballot. In a bad year, that number can approach two-thirds.
Why are so many Americans consistently missing in action on Election Day?
For many, it’s a choice. They are disillusioned with government, or they feel their vote doesn’t matter because politicians don’t listen to them anyway.
For many more, the main obstacle is bureaucratic inertia. In New York City, a decrepit, incompetent, self-dealing board of elections has been making a mockery of democracy for decades. Just in the past four years, tens of thousands of absentee ballots have been sent to the wrong addresses, and hundreds of thousands of voters have been wrongly purged from the rolls. For the past few days, some New Yorkers have been forced to stand in line for four or five hours to cast their ballots.
But across the country, the group most responsible for making voting harder, if not impossible, for millions of Americans is the Republican Party. Republicans have been saying it themselves for ages. “I don’t want everybody to vote,” Paul Weyrich, a leader of the modern conservative movement, told a gathering of religious leaders in 1980. “As a matter of fact, our leverage in the elections quite candidly goes up as the voting populace goes down.”
This strategy has become a central pillar of the G.O.P. platform. It is behind the party’s relentless push for certain state laws and practices — like strict voter-identification requirements and targeted voter purges — that claim to be about preserving electoral integrity but are in fact about suppressing turnout and voting among groups that lean Democratic.
The strategy also is behind the partisan gerrymandering that Republican state lawmakers have mastered over the past decade, redrawing district lines to keep themselves in power even when they lose a majority of the statewide vote. (Democrats gerrymander when they can, too, but the most egregious examples of the past decade have been by Republicans.)
And the party is behind the early shutdown of this year’s census, which the Trump administration insisted on over the objections of longtime Census Bureau officials, and which it hopes will result in an undercount of people in Democratic-leaning parts of the country.
The Supreme Court’s conservative majority has greenlit the Republicans’ anti-democratic power grabs. In 2013, by a 5-to-4 vote, the court struck down the heart of the Voting Rights Act, giving free rein to states with long histories of racial discrimination in voting. Last year, the court, again by a 5-to-4 vote, refused to block even the most brazenly partisan gerrymanders, no matter how much they disenfranchised voters.
This year, in the face of the unprecedented hurdles to voting introduced by the coronavirus pandemic, Republicans are battling from coast to coast to ensure that casting a ballot is as hard as it can be. In Texas, Gov. Greg Abbott mandated a single ballot drop-box per county — including the increasingly Democratic Harris County, population 4.7 million. Republican lawmakers there are also suing to throw out more than 100,000 ballots cast by Harris County voters from their cars, at drive-through sites.
In Nevada, the Trump campaign and the state Republican Party have sued to stop counting mail-in ballots until observers can more closely monitor the signature-matching process. In Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Wisconsin, Republicans have fought to prevent the counting of all mail-in ballots that arrive after Election Day, even if they are postmarked on or before Nov. 3.
This all amounts to “a concerted national Republican effort across the country in every one of the states that has had a legal battle to make it harder for citizens to vote,” said Trevor Potter, a Republican lawyer who formerly led the Federal Election Commission and worked on both of John McCain’s presidential campaigns.
The effort has been turbocharged by President Trump, who has spent the past year falsely attacking the integrity of mail-in ballots. Mr. Trump’s lies have been echoed by the attorney general, William Barr, who has claimed that mail balloting is associated with “substantial fraud.” Not remotely true. Mr. Trump’s own handpicked F.B.I. director, Christopher Wray, has said there is no evidence of any coordinated voter-fraud effort. Scholars, researchers and judges have said for years that voting fraud of any kind is vanishingly rare in this country. That hasn’t stopped Republicans from alleging that it happens all the time. They know that accusations of fraud can be enough by themselves to confuse voters and drive down turnout.
When that tactic fails, Republicans turn to another tried-and-true one: voter intimidation. Frightening people, particularly Black people, away from the ballot box has a long history in the United States. Modern Republicans have done it so consistently that in 1982 a federal court barred the national party from engaging in any so-called anti-voter-fraud operations. The ban was renewed again and again over the decades, because Republicans kept violating it. In 2018, however, it expired, meaning that 2020 is the first election in which Republicans can intimidate with abandon.
All the while, Mr. Trump happily plays the part of intimidator in chief. He has urged his supporters to enlist in an “Army for Trump,” monitoring polls. “A lot of strange things happening in Philadelphia,” Mr. Trump said during a recent campaign stop in Pennsylvania. “We’re watching you, Philadelphia. We’re watching at the highest level.”
Representative democracy works only when a large majority of people participate in choosing their representatives. That can happen only when those in power agree that voting should be as easy and widely available as possible. Yet today, one of the two major political parties is convinced it cannot win on a level playing field — and will not even try.
What would a level playing field look like? For starters, it would have more polling places, more early-voting days and shorter voting lines. Since the Supreme Court gutted the heart of the Voting Rights Act in 2013, almost 1,700 polling places have been shut down, most of them in the states that had been under federal supervision for their past discriminatory voting practices. It’s no surprise that voters in predominantly Black neighborhoods wait 29 percent longer to cast ballots than voters in white neighborhoods.
A fair election would mean giving all states the necessary funds to implement automatic voter registration and to upgrade old voting machines. It would mean allowing people with criminal records to vote as soon as they have completed the terms of their sentences.
Many of these reforms have already been adopted in some states, and they have enjoyed bipartisan support. In the case of early voting, some Republican-led states are ahead of their Democratic counterparts. Georgia, for example, has long offered many weeks of early voting — far better than New York, which began the practice only last year, and for only 10 days. (It’s worth noting that Georgia once had even more early-voting days. Republican lawmakers cut them back by more than half after Black voters started taking advantage of early voting in 2008.)
To help ensure that voting is easier for everybody, the federal government needs to take action. Currently, there are two comprehensive voting-rights bills in Congress, the Voting Rights Amendment Act and H.R. 1, also known as the For the People Act. The first bill would update the old map the Supreme Court invalidated in 2013 and would identify the states and localities that are racially discriminating against their voters today, requiring them to seek federal court approval before changing any election laws.
The second bill would, among other things, create a national voter-registration program; make it harder for states to purge voting rolls; and take gerrymandering away from self-interested state legislatures, putting the redistricting process in the hands of nonpartisan commissions.
The House of Representatives passed both of these bills in 2019, with all Democrats voting in favor both times. The Voting Rights Amendment Act got the vote of a single House Republican. H.R. 1 got none. The Republican-led Senate has refused to act on either. Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, mocked H.R. 1 by referring to it as the “Democrat Politician Protection Act.” Listen to him closely. He is only repeating what most Republicans have believed for decades: When more people vote, Republicans lose.
That’s why, if either of these laws is going to pass, it will require, at a minimum, voting out Republicans at every level who insist on suppressing the vote. Only then can those who believe in representative democracy for all Americans reset the rules and help ensure that everyone’s vote counts.

Classification




Language: ENGLISH
 Document-Type: Editorial
 Publication-Type: Web Blog
 Subject: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (95%); VOTERS & VOTING (93%); ELECTIONS (92%); DEMOCRACIES (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); REDISTRICTING (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); BALLOTS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); ELECTION LAW (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); RIGHT TO VOTE (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); VOTER SUPPRESSION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%); VOTER REGISTRATION (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (72%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (60%); PANDEMICS (56%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (55%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS VOCATIONS (50%); RELIGION (50%); Voter Registration and Requirements (%); Absentee Voting (%); Black People (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Voting Rights Act (1965) (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); Voter Fraud (Election Fraud) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Republican Party (%)
 Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); Trump, Donald J
 Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (95%)
 Load-Date: November 2, 2020

 

End of Document
